28582834	Mutations in the leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) gene are a common cause of autosomal dominant familial Parkinson's disease (PD). LRRK2 encodes a multi-domain protein containing GTPase and kinase enzymatic domains.  Disease-associated mutations in LRRK2 variably influence enzymatic activity with the common G2019S variant leading to enhanced kinase activity. Mutant LRRK2 induces neuronal toxicity through a kinase-dependent mechanism suggesting that kinase activity is important for mediating the pathogenic effects of LRRK2 mutations. A number of LRRK2 kinase substrates have been identified in vitro but whether they represent authentic physiological substrates in mammalian cells or tissues is not yet clear. The eukaryotic initiation factor 4E (eIF4E)-binding protein, 4E-BP1, was recently identified as a potential substrate of LRRK2 kinase activity in vitro and in Drosophila with phosphorylation occurring at Thr37 and Thr46. Here, we explore a potential interaction of LRRK2 and 4E-BP1 in mammalian cells and brain. We find that LRRK2 can weakly phosphorylate 4E-BP1 in vitro but LRRK2 overexpression is not able to alter endogenous 4E-BP1 phosphorylation in mammalian cells. In mammalian neurons LRRK2 and 4E-BP1 display minimal co-localization, whereas the subcellular distribution, protein complex formation and covalent post-translational modification of endogenous 4E-BP1 are not altered in the brains of LRRK2 knockout or mutant LRRK2 transgenic mice. In the brain, the phosphorylation of 4E-BP1 at Thr37 and Thr46 does not change in LRRK2 knockout or mutant LRRK2 transgenic mice, nor is 4E-BP1 phosphorylation altered in idiopathic or G2019S mutant PD brains. Collectively, our results suggest that 4E-BP1 is neither a major nor robust physiological substrate of LRRK2 in mammalian cells or brain.
28582849	Mutations in LRRK2, encoding the multifunctional protein leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2), are a common cause of Parkinson disease. LRRK2 has been suggested to influence the cytoskeleton as LRRK2 mutants reduce neurite outgrowth and cause an accumulation of hyperphosphorylated Tau. This might cause alterations in the dynamic instability of microtubules suggested to contribute to the pathogenesis of Parkinson disease. Here, we describe a direct interaction between LRRK2 and beta-tubulin. This interaction is conferred by the LRRK2 Roc domain and is disrupted by the familial R1441G mutation and artificial Roc domain mutations that mimic autophosphorylation. LRRK2 selectively interacts with three beta-tubulin isoforms: TUBB, TUBB4, and TUBB6, one of which (TUBB4) is mutated in the movement disorder dystonia type 4 (DYT4). Binding specificity is determined by lysine 362 and alanine 364 of beta-tubulin. Molecular modeling was used to map the interaction surface to the luminal face of microtubule protofibrils in close proximity to the lysine 40 acetylation site in alpha-tubulin. This location is predicted to be poorly accessible within mature stabilized microtubules, but exposed in dynamic microtubule populations. Consistent with this finding, endogenous LRRK2 displays a preferential localization to dynamic microtubules within growth cones, rather than adjacent axonal microtubule bundles. This interaction is functionally relevant to microtubule dynamics, as mouse embryonic fibroblasts derived from LRRK2 knock-out mice display increased microtubule acetylation. Taken together, our data shed light on the nature of the LRRK2 to tubulin interaction, and indicate that alterations in microtubule stability caused by changes in LRRK2 might contribute to the pathogenesis of Parkinson disease.
28582909	Mutations in LRRK2 play a critical role in both familial and sporadic Parkinson's disease (PD). Up to date, the role of LRRK2 in PD onset and progression remains largely unknown. However, experimental evidence highlights a critical role of LRRK2 in the control of vesicle trafficking that in turn may regulate different aspects of neuronal physiology. We have analyzed the role of LRRK2 in regulating dopamine receptor D1 (DRD1) and D2 (DRD2) trafficking. DRD1 and DRD2 are the most abundant dopamine receptors in the brain. They differ in structural, pharmacological and biochemical properties, as well as in localization and internalization mechanisms. Our results indicate that disease-associated mutant G2019S LRRK2 impairs DRD1 internalization, leading to an alteration in signal transduction. Moreover, the mutant forms of LRRK2 affect receptor turnover by decreasing the rate of DRD2 trafficking from the Golgi complex to the cell membrane. Collectively, our findings are consistent with the conclusion that LRRK2 influences the motility of neuronal vesicles and the neuronal receptor trafficking. These findings have important implications for the complex role that LRRK2 plays in neuronal physiology and the possible pathological mechanisms that may lead to neuronal death in PD.
28582809	Mutations in the leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 gene (LRRK2) cause late-onset Parkinson's disease (PD) with a clinical appearance indistinguishable from idiopathic PD. Initial studies suggest that LRRK2 mutations are the most common yet identified determinant of PD susceptibility, transmitted in an autosomal-dominant mode of inheritance. Herein, we characterize the LRRK2 gene and transcript in human brain and subclone the predominant ORF. Exogenously expressed LRRK2 protein migrates at approximately 280 kDa and is present largely in the cytoplasm but also associates with the mitochondrial outer membrane.  Familial-linked mutations G2019S or R1441C do not have an obvious effect on protein steady-state levels, turnover, or localization. However, in vitro kinase assays using full-length recombinant LRRK2 reveal an increase in activity caused by familial-linked mutations in both autophosphorylation and the phosphorylation of a generic substrate. These results suggest a gain-of-function mechanism for LRRK2-linked disease with a central role for kinase activity in the development of PD.
28582810	Parkinson's disease (PD) is a disorder of movement, cognition, and emotion, and it is characterized pathologically by neuronal degeneration with Lewy bodies, which are cytoplasmic inclusion bodies containing deposits of aggregated proteins. Most PD cases appear to be sporadic, but genetic forms of the disease, caused by mutations in alpha-synuclein, parkin, and other genes, have helped elucidate pathogenesis. Mutations in leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) cause autosomal-dominant Parkinsonism with clinical features of PD and with pleomorphic pathology including deposits of aggregated protein. To study expression and interactions of LRRK2, we synthesized cDNAs and generated expression constructs coding for human WT and mutant LRRK2 proteins. Expression of full-length LRRK2 in cells in culture suggests that the protein is predominately cytoplasmic, as is endogenous protein by subcellular fractionation. Using coimmunoprecipitation, we find that LRRK2, expressed in cells in culture, interacts with parkin but not with alpha-synuclein, DJ-1, or tau. A small proportion of the cells overexpressing LRRK2 contain protein aggregates, and this proportion is greatly increased by coexpression of parkin. In addition, parkin increases ubiquitination of aggregated protein. Also, mutant LRRK2 causes neuronal degeneration in both SH-SY5Y cells and primary neurons. This cell model may be useful for studies of PD cellular pathogenesis and therapeutics. These findings suggest a gain-of-function mechanism in the pathogenesis of LRRK2-linked PD and suggest that LRRK2 may be involved in a pathogenic pathway with other PD-related proteins such as parkin, which may help illuminate both familial and sporadic PD."
28582811	Mutations in LRRK2 underlie an autosomal-dominant, inherited form of Parkinson's disease (PD) that mimics the clinical features of the common "sporadic" form of PD. The LRRK2 protein includes putative GTPase, protein kinase, WD40 repeat, and leucine-rich repeat (LRR) domains of unknown function. Here we show that PD-associated LRRK2 mutations display disinhibited kinase activity and induce a progressive reduction in neurite length and branching both in primary neuronal cultures and in the intact rodent CNS. In contrast, LRRK2 deficiency leads to increased neurite length and branching. Neurons that express PD-associated LRRK2 mutations additionally harbor prominent phospho-tau-positive inclusions with lysosomal characteristics and ultimately undergo apoptosis."
28582812	Parkinson's disease (PD), a progressive neurodegenerative disease characterized by bradykinesia, rigidity, and resting tremor, is the most common neurodegenerative movement disorder. Although the majority of PD cases are sporadic, some are inherited, including those caused by leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) mutations. The substitution of serine for glycine at position 2019 (G2019S) in the kinase domain of LRRK2 represents the most prevalent genetic mutation in both familial and apparently sporadic cases of PD. Because mutations in LRRK2 are likely associated with a toxic gain of function, destabilization of LRRK2 may be a novel way to limit its detrimental effects. Here we show that LRRK2 forms a complex with heat shock protein 90 (Hsp90) in vivo and that inhibition of Hsp90 disrupts the association of Hsp90 with LRRK2 and leads to proteasomal degradation of LRRK2. Hsp90 inhibitors may therefore limit the mutant LRRK2-elicited toxicity to neurons. As a proof of principle, we show that Hsp90 inhibitors rescue the axon growth retardation caused by overexpression of the LRRK2 G2019S mutation in neurons. Therefore, inhibition of LRRK2 kinase activity can be achieved by blocking Hsp90-mediated chaperone activity and Hsp90 inhibitors may serve as potential anti-PD drugs."
28582813	Mutations in leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) are the most common genetic cause of Parkinson's disease. We created a LRRK2 transgenic mouse model that recapitulates cardinal features of the disease: an age-dependent and levodopa-responsive slowness of movement associated with diminished dopamine release and axonal pathology of nigrostriatal dopaminergic projection. These mice provide a valid model of Parkinson's disease and are a resource for the investigation of pathogenesis and therapeutics."
28582814	Dominantly inherited mutations in leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) are a common genetic cause of Parkinson's disease (PD). The importance of the R1441 residue in the pathogenesis is highlighted by the identification of three distinct missense mutations. To investigate the pathogenic mechanism underlying LRRK2 dysfunction, we generated a knockin (KI) mouse in which the R1441C mutation is expressed under the control of the endogenous regulatory elements. Homozygous R1441C KI mice appear grossly normal and exhibit no dopaminergic (DA) neurodegeneration or alterations in steady-state levels of striatal dopamine up to 2 years of age. However, these KI mice show reductions in amphetamine (AMPH)-induced locomotor activity and stimulated catecholamine release in cultured chromaffin cells. The introduction of the R1441C mutation also impairs dopamine D2 receptor function, as suggested by decreased responses of KI mice in locomotor activity to the inhibitory effect of a D2 receptor agonist, quinpirole.  Furthermore, the firing of nigral neurons in R1441C KI mice show reduced sensitivity to suppression induced by quinpirole, dopamine, or AMPH. Together, our data suggest that the R1441C mutation in LRRK2 impairs stimulated dopamine neurotransmission and D2 receptor function, which may represent pathogenic precursors preceding dopaminergic degeneration in PD brains.
28582815	Mutations in the leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) gene are the most common known cause of Parkinson's disease (PD). Whether loss of LRRK2 function accounts for neurodegeneration of dopamine neurons in PD is not known, nor is it known whether LRRK2 kinase activity modulates the susceptibility of dopamine (DA) neurons to the selective dopaminergic toxin, 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine(MPTP). To better understand the role of LRRK2 in DA neuronal survival and its role in the susceptibility of DA neurons to MPTP, we generated LRRK2 knock-out (KO) mice lacking the kinase domain of LRRK2. Here, we show that LRRK2 KO mice are viable and have no major abnormalities and live to adulthood. The dopaminergic system is normal in LRRK2 KO mice as assessed via HPLC for DA and its metabolites and via stereologic assessment of DA neuron number in young and aged mice. Importantly, there is no significant difference in the susceptibility of LRRK2 KO and wild-type mice to MPTP. These results suggest that LRRK2 plays little if any role in the development and survival of DA neurons under physiologic conditions. Thus, PD due to LRRK2 mutations are likely not due to a loss of function. Moreover, LRRK2 is not required for the susceptibility of DA neurons to MPTP.\\n"
28582816	Mutations in alpha-synuclein and Leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) are linked to autosomal dominant forms of Parkinson's disease (PD). However, little is known about any potential pathophysiological interplay between these two PD-related genes. Here we show in transgenic mice that although overexpression of LRRK2 alone did not cause neurodegeneration, the presence of excess LRRK2 greatly accelerated the progression of neuropathological abnormalities developed in PD-related A53T alpha-synuclein transgenic mice. Moreover, we found that LRRK2 promoted the abnormal aggregation and somatic accumulation of alpha-synuclein in A53T mice, which likely resulted from the impairment of microtubule dynamics, Golgi organization, and the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. Conversely, genetic ablation of LRRK2 preserved the Golgi structure and suppressed the aggregation and somatic accumulation of alpha-synuclein, and thereby delayed the progression of neuropathology in A53T mice. These findings demonstrate that overexpression of LRRK2 enhances alpha-synuclein-mediated cytotoxicity and suggest inhibition of LRRK2 expression as a potential therapeutic option for ameliorating alpha-synuclein-induced neurodegeneration.
28582817	PARK8/LRRK2 (leucine-rich repeat kinase 2) was recently identified as a causative gene for autosomal dominant Parkinson's disease (PD), with LRRK2 mutation G2019S linked to the most frequent familial form of PD. Emerging in vitro evidence indicates that aberrant enzymatic activity of LRRK2 protein carrying this mutation can cause neurotoxicity. However, the physiological and pathophysiological functions of LRRK2 in vivo remain elusive. Here we characterize two bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) transgenic mouse strains overexpressing LRRK2 wild-type (Wt) or mutant G2019S. Transgenic LRRK2-Wt mice had elevated striatal dopamine (DA) release with unaltered DA uptake or tissue content. Consistent with this result, LRRK2-Wt mice were hyperactive and showed enhanced performance in motor function tests. These results suggest a role for LRRK2 in striatal DA transmission and the consequent motor function. In contrast, LRRK2-G2019S mice showed an age-dependent decrease in striatal DA content, as well as decreased striatal DA release and uptake. Despite increased brain kinase activity, LRRK2-G2019S overexpression was not associated with loss of DAergic neurons in substantia nigra or degeneration of nigrostriatal terminals at 12 months. Our results thus reveal a pivotal role for LRRK2 in regulating striatal DA transmission and consequent control of motor function. The PD-associated mutation G2019S may exert pathogenic effects by impairing these functions of LRRK2. Our LRRK2 BAC transgenic mice, therefore, could provide a useful model for understanding early PD pathological events.
28582818	LRRK2 (leucine-rich repeat protein kinase 2) is mutated in a significant number of Parkinson's disease patients, but still little is understood about how it is regulated or functions. In the present study we have demonstrated that 14-3-3 protein isoforms interact with LRRK2. Consistent with this, endogenous LRRK2 isolated from Swiss 3T3 cells or various mouse tissues is associated with endogenous 14-3-3 isoforms. We have established that 14-3-3 binding is mediated by phosphorylation of LRRK2 at two conserved residues (Ser910 and Ser935) located before the leucine-rich repeat domain. Our results suggests that mutation of Ser910 and/or Ser935 to disrupt 14-3-3 binding does not affect intrinsic protein kinase activity, but induces LRRK2 to accumulate within discrete cytoplasmic pools, perhaps resembling inclusion bodies. To investigate links between 14-3-3 binding and Parkinson's disease, we studied how 41 reported mutations of LRRK2 affected 14-3-3 binding and cellular localization. Strikingly, we found that five of the six most common pathogenic mutations (R1441C, R1441G, R1441H, Y1699C and I2020T) display markedly reduced phosphorylation of Ser910/Ser935 thereby disrupting interaction with 14-3-3. We have also demonstrated that Ser910/Ser935 phosphorylation and 14-3-3 binding to endogenous LRRK2 is significantly reduced in tissues of homozygous LRRK2(R1441C) knock-in mice. Consistent with 14-3-3 regulating localization, all of the common pathogenic mutations displaying reduced 14-3-3-binding accumulated within inclusion bodies. We also found that three of the 41 LRRK2 mutations analysed displayed elevated protein kinase activity (R1728H, ~2-fold; G2019S, ~3-fold; and T2031S, ~4-fold). These results provide the first evidence suggesting that 14-3-3 regulates LRRK2 and that disruption of the interaction of LRRK2 with 14-3-3 may be linked to Parkinson's disease."
28582819	Mutations in the Leucine Rich Repeat Kinase 2 (LRRK2) gene, first described in 2004 have now emerged as the most important genetic finding in both autosomal dominant and sporadic Parkinson's disease (PD). While a formidable research effort has ensued since the initial gene discovery, little is known of either the normal or the pathological role of LRRK2. We have created lines of mice that express human wild-type (hWT) or G2019S Lrrk2 via bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) transgenesis. In vivo analysis of the dopaminergic system revealed abnormal dopamine neurotransmission in both hWT and G2019S transgenic mice evidenced by a decrease in extra-cellular dopamine levels, which was detected without pharmacological manipulation. Immunopathological analysis revealed changes in localization and increased phosphorylation of microtubule binding protein tau in G2019S mice. Quantitative biochemical analysis confirmed the presence of differential phospho-tau species in G2019S mice but surprisingly, upon dephosphorylation the tau isoform banding pattern in G2019S mice remained altered. This suggests that other post-translational modifications of tau occur in G2019S mice. We hypothesize that Lrrk2 may impact on tau processing which subsequently leads to increased phosphorylation. Our models will be useful for further understanding of the mechanistic actions of LRRK2 and future therapeutic screening.
28582820	Leucine-rich repeat kinase-2 (LRRK2) mutations are a common cause of Parkinson's disease. Here we identify inhibitors of LRRK2 kinase that are protective in in vitro and in vivo models of LRRK2-induced neurodegeneration. These results establish that LRRK2-induced degeneration of neurons in vivo is kinase dependent and that LRRK2 kinase inhibition provides a potential new neuroprotective paradigm for the treatment of Parkinson's disease.
28582821	OBJECTIVE: To assess the contribution of wild-type, mutant and loss of leucine-rich repeat kinase-2 (LRRK2; Lrrk2) on dendritic neuronal arborization.  BACKGROUND: LRRK2 mutations are recognized as the major genetic determinant of susceptibility to Parkinson's disease for which a cellular assay of Lrrk2 mutant function would facilitate the development of targeted molecular therapeutics.  METHODS: Dendritic neuronal arborization (neurite length, branching and the number of processes per cell) was quantified in primary hippocampal and midbrain cultures derived from five lines of recombinant LRRK2 mice, including human BAC wild-type and mutant overexpressors (Y1699C and G2019S), murine knock-out and G2019S knock-in animals.  RESULTS: Neuronal arborization in cultures from BAC Lrrk2 wild-type animals is comparable to non-transgenic littermate controls, despite high levels of human transgene expression. In contrast, primary neurons from both BAC mutant overexpressors presented with significantly reduced neuritic outgrowth and branching, although the total number of processes per cell remained comparable.  The mutant-specific toxic gain-of-function observed in cultures from BAC mutant mice may be partially rescued by staurosporine treatment, a non-specific kinase inhibitor. In contrast, neuronal arborization is far more extensive in neuronal cultures derived from murine knock-out mice that lack endogenous Lrrk2 expression. In Lrrk2 G2019S knock-in mice, arguably the most physiologically relevant system, neuritic arborization is not impaired.  CONCLUSIONS: Impairment of neuritic arborization is an exaggerated, albeit mutant specific, consequence of Lrrk2 over-expression in primary cultures. The phenotype and assay described provides a means to develop therapeutic agents that modulate the toxic gain-of-function conferred by mutant Lrrk2.
28582822	Mutations in human leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (Lrrk2), a protein of yet unknown function, are linked to Parkinson's disease caused by degeneration of midbrain dopaminergic neurons. The protein comprises several domains including a GTPase and a kinase domain both affected by several pathogenic mutations. To elucidate the molecular interaction network of endogenous Lrrk2 under stoichiometric constraints, we applied QUICK (quantitative immunoprecipitation combined with knockdown) in NIH3T3 cells. The identified interactome reveals actin isoforms as well as actin-associated proteins involved in actin filament assembly, organization, rearrangement, and maintenance, suggesting that the biological function of Lrrk2 is linked to cytoskeletal dynamics. In fact, we demonstrate Lrrk2 de novo binding to F-actin and its ability to modulate its assembly in vitro. When tested in intact cells, knockdown of Lrrk2 causes morphological alterations in NIH3T3 cells. In developing dopaminergic midbrain primary neurons, Lrrk2 knockdown results in shortened neurite processes, indicating a physiological role of Lrrk2 in cytoskeletal organization and dynamics of dopaminergic neurons. Hence, our results demonstrate that molecular interactions as well as the physiological function of Lrrk2 are closely related to the organization of the actin-based cytoskeleton, a crucial feature of neuronal development and neuron function.
28582823	The generation and maturation of adult neural stem/progenitor cells are impaired in many neurodegenerative diseases, among them is Parkinson's disease (PD). In mammals, including humans, adult neurogenesis is a lifelong feature of cellular brain plasticity in the hippocampal dentate gyrus (DG) and in the subventricular zone (SVZ)/olfactory bulb system. Hyposmia, depression, and anxiety are early non-motor symptoms in PD. There are parallels between brain regions associated with non-motor symptoms in PD and neurogenic regions. In autosomal dominant PD, mutations in the leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) gene are frequent. LRRK2 homologs in non-vertebrate systems play an important role in chemotaxis, cell polarity, and neurite arborization. We investigated adult neurogenesis and the neurite development of new neurons in the DG and SVZ/olfactory bulb system in bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) human Lrrk2 G2019S transgenic mice. We report that mutant human Lrrk2 is highly expressed in the hippocampus in the DG and the SVZ of adult Lrrk2 G2019S mice. Proliferation of newly generated cells is significantly decreased and survival of newly generated neurons in the DG and olfactory bulb is also severely impaired. In addition, after stereotactic injection of a GFP retrovirus, newly generated neurons in the DG of Lrrk2 G2019S mice exhibited reduced dendritic arborization and fewer spines. This loss in mature, developed spines might point towards a decrease in synaptic connectivity.  Interestingly, physical activity partially reverses the decrease in neuroblasts observed in Lrrk2 G2010S mice. These data further support a role for Lrrk2 in neuronal morphogenesis and provide new insights into the role of Lrrk2 in adult neurogenesis.
28582824	Mutations in the leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) gene cause late-onset, autosomal dominant familial Parkinson's disease (PD) and also contribute to idiopathic PD. LRRK2 mutations represent the most common cause of PD with clinical and neurochemical features that are largely indistinguishable from idiopathic disease. Currently, transgenic mice expressing wild-type or disease-causing mutants of LRRK2 have failed to produce overt neurodegeneration, although abnormalities in nigrostriatal dopaminergic neurotransmission have been observed. Here, we describe the development and characterization of transgenic mice expressing human LRRK2 bearing the familial PD mutations, R1441C and G2019S.  Our study demonstrates that expression of G2019S mutant LRRK2 induces the degeneration of nigrostriatal pathway dopaminergic neurons in an age-dependent manner. In addition, we observe autophagic and mitochondrial abnormalities in the brains of aged G2019S LRRK2 mice and markedly reduced neurite complexity of cultured dopaminergic neurons. These new LRRK2 transgenic mice will provide important tools for understanding the mechanism(s) through which familial mutations precipitate neuronal degeneration and PD.
28582825	The leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) protein has both guanosine triphosphatase (GTPase) and kinase activities, and mutation in either enzymatic domain can cause late-onset Parkinson disease. Nucleotide binding in the GTPase domain may be required for kinase activity, and residues in the GTPase domain are potential sites for autophosphorylation, suggesting a complex mechanism of intrinsic regulation. To further define the effects of LRRK2 autophosphorylation, we applied a technique optimal for detection of protein phosphorylation, electron transfer dissociation, and identified autophosphorylation events exclusively nearby the nucleotide binding pocket in the GTPase domain.  Parkinson-disease-linked mutations alter kinase activity but did not alter autophosphorylation site specificity or sites of phosphorylation in a robust in vitro substrate myelin basic protein. Amino acid substitutions in the GTPase domain have large effects on kinase activity, as insertion of the GTPase-associated R1441C pathogenic mutation together with the G2019S kinase domain mutation resulted in a multiplicative increase (~7-fold) in activity.  Removal of a conserved autophosphorylation site (T1503) by mutation to an alanine residue resulted in greatly decreased GTP-binding and kinase activities. While autophosphorylation likely serves to potentiate kinase activity, we find that oligomerization and loss of the active dimer species occur in an ATP- and autophosphorylation-independent manner. LRRK2 autophosphorylation sites are overall robustly protected from dephosphorylation in vitro, suggesting tight control over activity in vivo. We developed highly specific antibodies targeting pT1503 but failed to detect endogenous autophosphorylation in protein derived from transgenic mice and cell lines. LRRK2 activity in vivo is unlikely to be constitutive but rather refined to specific responses.
28582826	Mutations in leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) cause late-onset Parkinson's disease (PD), but the underlying pathophysiological mechanisms and the normal function of this large multidomain protein remain speculative. To address the role of this protein in vivo, we generated three different LRRK2 mutant mouse lines. Mice completely lacking the LRRK2 protein (knock-out, KO) showed an early-onset (age 6 weeks) marked increase in number and size of secondary lysosomes in kidney proximal tubule cells and lamellar bodies in lung type II cells. Mice expressing a LRRK2 kinase-dead (KD) mutant from the endogenous locus displayed similar early-onset pathophysiological changes in kidney but not lung.  KD mutants had dramatically reduced full-length LRRK2 protein levels in the kidney and this genetic effect was mimicked pharmacologically in wild-type mice treated with a LRRK2-selective kinase inhibitor. Knock-in (KI) mice expressing the G2019S PD-associated mutation that increases LRRK2 kinase activity showed none of the LRRK2 protein level and histopathological changes observed in KD and KO mice. The autophagy marker LC3 remained unchanged but kidney mTOR and TCS2 protein levels decreased in KD and increased in KO and KI mice. Unexpectedly, KO and KI mice suffered from diastolic hypertension opposed to normal blood pressure in KD mice. Our findings demonstrate a role for LRRK2 in kidney and lung physiology and further show that LRRK2 kinase function affects LRRK2 protein steady-state levels thereby altering putative scaffold/GTPase activity. These novel aspects of peripheral LRRK2 biology critically impact ongoing attempts to develop LRRK2 selective kinase inhibitors as therapeutics for PD.
28582827	Mutations in the leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 gene (LRRK2) are the most common genetic cause of Parkinson's disease (PD) and cause both autosomal dominant familial and sporadic PD. Currently, the physiological and pathogenic activities of LRRK2 are poorly understood. To decipher the biological functions of LRRK2, including the genes and pathways modulated by LRRK2 kinase activity in vivo, we assayed genome-wide mRNA expression in the brain and peripheral tissues from LRRK2 knockout (KO) and kinase hyperactive G2019S (G2019S) transgenic mice. Subtle but significant differences in mRNA expression were observed relative to wild-type (WT) controls in the cortex, striatum and kidney of KO animals, but only in the striatum in the G2019S model. In contrast, robust, consistent and highly significant differences were identified by the direct comparison of KO and G2019S profiles in the cortex, striatum, kidney and muscle, indicating opposite effects on mRNA expression by the two models relative to WT. Ribosomal and glycolytic biological functions were consistently and significantly up-regulated in LRRK2 G2019S compared with LRRK2 KO tissues. Genes involved in membrane-bound organelles, oxidative phosphorylation, mRNA processing and the endoplasmic reticulum were down-regulated in LRRK2 G2019S mice compared with KO. We confirmed the expression patterns of 35 LRRK2-regulated genes using quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction. These findings provide the first description of the transcriptional responses to genetically modified LRRK2 activity and provide preclinical target engagement and/or pharmacodynamic biomarker strategies for LRRK2 and may inform future therapeutic strategies for LRRK2-associated PD."
28582828	LRRK2, a Parkinson's disease associated gene, is highly expressed in microglia in addition to neurons; however, its function in microglia has not been evaluated.  Using Lrrk2 knockdown (Lrrk2-KD) murine microglia prepared by lentiviral-mediated transfer of Lrrk2-specific small inhibitory hairpin RNA (shRNA), we found that Lrrk2 deficiency attenuated lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced mRNA and/or protein expression of inducible nitric oxide synthase, TNF-α, IL-1β and IL-6. LPS-induced phosphorylation of p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase and stimulation of NF-κB-responsive luciferase reporter activity was also decreased in Lrrk2-KD cells. Interestingly, the decrease in NF-κB transcriptional activity measured by luciferase assays appeared to reflect increased binding of the inhibitory NF-κB homodimer, p50/p50, to DNA. In LPS-responsive HEK293T cells, overexpression of the human LRRK2 pathologic, kinase-active mutant G2019S increased basal and LPS-induced levels of phosphorylated p38 and JNK, whereas wild-type and other pathologic (R1441C and G2385R) or artificial kinase-dead (D1994A) LRRK2 mutants either enhanced or did not change basal and LPS-induced p38 and JNK phosphorylation levels. However, wild-type LRRK2 and all LRRK2 mutant variants equally enhanced NF-κB transcriptional activity. Taken together, these results suggest that LRRK2 is a positive regulator of inflammation in murine microglia, and LRRK2 mutations may alter the microenvironment of the brain to favor neuroinflammation.
28582829	(G2019S) mutation of leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) is the most common genetic cause of both familial and sporadic Parkinson's disease (PD) cases.  Twelve- to sixteen-month-old (G2019S) LRRK2 transgenic mice prepared by us displayed progressive degeneration of substantia nigra pars compacta (SNpc) dopaminergic neurons and parkinsonism phenotypes of motor dysfunction. LRRK2 is a member of mixed lineage kinase subfamily of mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase kinases (MAPKKKs). We hypothesized that (G2019S) mutation augmented LRRK2 kinase activity, leading to overphosphorylation of downstream MAPK kinase (MKK) and resulting in activation of neuronal death signal pathway. Consistent with our hypothesis, (G2019S) LRRK2 expressed in HEK 293 cells exhibited an augmented kinase activity of phosphorylating MAPK kinase 4 (MKK4) at Ser(257), and protein expression of active phospho-MKK4(Ser257) was upregulated in the SN of (G2019S) LRRK2 transgenic mice. Protein level of active phospho-JNK(Thr183/Tyr185) and phospho-c-Jun(Ser63), downstream targets of phospho-MKK4(Ser257), was increased in the SN of (G2019S) LRRK2 mice. Upregulated mRNA expression of pro-apoptotic Bim and FasL, target genes of phospho-c-Jun(Ser63), and formation of active caspase-9, caspase-8 and caspase-3 were also observed in the SN of (G2019S) LRRK2 transgenic mice. Our results suggest that mutant (G2019S) LRRK2 activates MKK4-JNK-c-Jun pathway in the SN and causes the resulting degeneration of SNpc dopaminergic neurons in PD transgenic mice."
28582830	Mutations in Leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) are the leading causes of genetically inherited Parkinson's disease (PD) identified so far. The underlying mechanism whereby missense alterations in LRRK2 initiate neurodegeneration remains largely unclear. Mitochondrial dysfunction has been recognized to contribute to the pathogenesis of both sporadic and familial PD. The pathogenic gain-of-function mutant form of LRRK2, LRRK2 G2019S, is associated with elevated kinase activity and PD. Here we show that LRRK2 G2019S can cause defects in the morphology and dynamics of mitochondria in cortical neurons. In neurons, endogenous LRRK2 and the mitochondrial fission factor Dynamin like protein 1 (DLP1) interact with and partially co-localize with each other. DLP1 plays an essential role in LRRK2-induced mitochondrial fission. In support of this, expression of LRRK2 leads to the translocation of DLP1 from the cytosol to the mitochondria and knockdown of DLP1 expression inhibits LRRK2-induced mitochondrial fission. In addition, co-expression of LRRK2 and DLP1 induces mitochondrial clearance. Furthermore, we have found that expression of LRRK2 leads to increased reactive oxygen species levels in cells. Taken together, our results provide insights into the pathobiology of LRRK2 and suggest that LRRK2 G2019S may induce neuronal dysfunction or cell death by disturbing normal mitochondrial fission/fusion dynamics and function.
28582831	Mutations in the LRRK2 gene are the most common cause of genetic Parkinson's disease. Although the mechanisms behind the pathogenic effects of LRRK2 mutations are still not clear, data emerging from in vitro and in vivo models suggests roles in regulating neuronal polarity, neurotransmission, membrane and cytoskeletal dynamics and protein degradation.We created mice lacking exon 41 that encodes the activation hinge of the kinase domain of LRRK2. We have performed a comprehensive analysis of these mice up to 20 months of age, including evaluation of dopamine storage, release, uptake and synthesis, behavioral testing, dendritic spine and proliferation/neurogenesis analysis.Our results show that the dopaminergic system was not functionally comprised in LRRK2 knockout mice. However, LRRK2 knockout mice displayed abnormal exploratory activity in the open-field test. Moreover, LRRK2 knockout mice stayed longer than their wild type littermates on the accelerated rod during rotarod testing.  Finally, we confirm that loss of LRRK2 caused degeneration in the kidney, accompanied by a progressive enhancement of autophagic activity and accumulation of autofluorescent material, but without evidence of biphasic changes.
28582832	The G2019S leucine rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) mutation is the most common genetic cause of Parkinson's disease (PD), clinically and pathologically indistinguishable from idiopathic PD. Mitochondrial abnormalities are a common feature in PD pathogenesis and we have investigated the impact of G2019S mutant LRRK2 expression on mitochondrial bioenergetics. LRRK2 protein expression was detected in fibroblasts and lymphoblasts at levels higher than those observed in the mouse brain. The presence of G2019S LRRK2 mutation did not influence LRRK2 expression in fibroblasts. However, the expression of the G2019S LRRK2 mutation in both fibroblast and neuroblastoma cells was associated with mitochondrial uncoupling. This was characterized by decreased mitochondrial membrane potential and increased oxygen utilization under basal and oligomycin-inhibited conditions.  This resulted in a decrease in cellular ATP levels consistent with compromised cellular function. This uncoupling of mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation was associated with a cell-specific increase in uncoupling protein (UCP) 2 and 4 expression. Restoration of mitochondrial membrane potential by the UCP inhibitor genipin confirmed the role of UCPs in this mechanism. The G2019S LRRK2-induced mitochondrial uncoupling and UCP4 mRNA up-regulation were LRRK2 kinase-dependent, whereas endogenous LRRK2 levels were required for constitutive UCP expression. We propose that normal mitochondrial function was deregulated by the expression of G2019S LRRK2 in a kinase-dependent mechanism that is a modification of the normal LRRK2 function, and this leads to the vulnerability of selected neuronal populations in PD.
28582833	Activating mutations in leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) are present in a subset of Parkinson's disease (PD) patients and may represent an attractive therapeutic target. Here we report a 2-anilino-4-methylamino-5-chloropyrimidine, HG-10-102-01(4) is a potent and selective inhibitor of wild-type LRRK2 and the G2019S mutant. Compound 4 substantially inhibits Ser910 and Ser935 phosphorylation of both wild-type LRRK2 and G2019S mutant at a concentration of 0.1-0.3 µM in cells and is the first compound reported to be capable of inhibiting Ser910 and Ser935 phosphorylation in mouse brain following intraperitoneal delivery of doses as low as 50 mg/kg.
28582835	Mutations in the genes encoding leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) and α-synuclein are associated with both autosomal dominant and idiopathic forms of Parkinson's disease (PD). α-Synuclein is the main protein in Lewy bodies, hallmark inclusions present in both sporadic and familial PD. We show that in PD brain tissue, the levels of LRRK2 are positively related to the increase in α-synuclein phosphorylation and aggregation in affected brain regions (amygdala and anterior cingulate cortex), but not in the unaffected visual cortex. In disease-affected regions, we show co-localization of these two proteins in neurons and Lewy body inclusions. Further, in vitro experiments show a molecular interaction between α-synuclein and LRRK2 under endogenous and over-expression conditions. In a cell culture model of α-synuclein inclusion formation, LRRK2 co-localizes with the α-synuclein inclusions, and knocking down LRRK2 increases the number of smaller inclusions. In addition to providing strong evidence for an interaction between LRRK2 and α-synuclein, our results shed light on the complex relationship between these two proteins in the brains of patients with PD and the underlying molecular mechanisms of the disease.
28582836	Mutations in the leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) have been associated with familial and sporadic cases of Parkinson disease. Mutant LRRK2 causes in vitro and in vivo neurite shortening, mediated in part by autophagy, and a parkinsonian phenotype in transgenic mice; however, the underlying mechanisms remain unclear.  Because mitochondrial content/function is essential for dendritic morphogenesis and maintenance, we investigated whether mutant LRRK2 affects mitochondrial homeostasis in neurons. Mouse cortical neurons expressing either LRRK2 G2019S or R1441C mutations exhibited autophagic degradation of mitochondria and dendrite shortening. In addition, mutant LRRK2 altered the ability of the neurons to buffer intracellular calcium levels. Either calcium chelators or inhibitors of voltage-gated L-type calcium channels prevented mitochondrial degradation and dendrite shortening. These data suggest that mutant LRRK2 causes a deficit in calcium homeostasis, leading to enhanced mitophagy and dendrite shortening.
28582837	Adult neurogenesis, the formation of new neurons in the mammalian forebrain, is one important mechanism maintaining lifelong neuronal plasticity. The generation and maturation of adult neural stem and progenitor cells is impaired in models of neurodegenerative diseases, in particular Parkinson's disease (PD). Monogenetic forms of PD were identified and associated with several genes including the leucine-rich-repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2). Some of the underlying mechanisms in neurodegenerative diseases are closely linked to neuronal plasticity, and induce changes in adult neurogenesis, neuritic maintenance, synaptic transmission, and neural connectivity. We investigated adult neurogenesis and neuritic development of newly formed neurons in the hippocampal dentate gyrus of LRRK2 knockout mice.  Proliferation and survival of newly generated cells were unchanged. However, the expression profile of maturation markers in surviving newly generated cells was altered. While immature neuronal phenotypes were significantly increased, the mature neuronal phenotype of surviving cells remained unchanged. Importantly, the absolute number of immature doublecortin positive neuroblasts was significantly increased in the hippocampus of LRRK2 knockout mice. These neuroblasts presented extended dendritic length with a more complex arborization. Furthermore, LRRK2 deletion resulted in an increased volume of the axonal mossy fiber bundle projecting from dentate granule cells to CA3 pyramidal neurons. Our findings suggest that LRRK2 influences neurogenesis and particularly neuronal morphogenesis. As neurogenesis and the pre-/post- synaptic compartments are significantly altered in PD, our data advance LRRK2 as a potent candidate in addressing neuroregenerative processes.
28582838	Recent studies indicate that the Parkinson's disease-linked leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) modulates cytoskeletal functions by regulating actin and tubulin dynamics, thereby affecting neurite outgrowth. By interactome analysis we demonstrate that the binding of LRRK2 to tubulins is significantly enhanced by pharmacological LRRK2 inhibition in cells. Co-incubation of LRRK2 with microtubules increased the LRRK2 GTPase activity in a cell-free assay.  Destabilization of microtubules causes a rapid decrease in cellular LRRK2(S935) phosphorylation indicating a decreased LRRK2 kinase activity. Moreover, both human LRRK2(G2019S) fibroblasts and mouse LRRK2(R1441G) fibroblasts exhibit alterations in cell migration in culture. Treatment of mouse fibroblasts with the selective LRRK2 inhibitor LRRK2-IN1 reduces cell motility. These findings suggest that LRRK2 and microtubules mutually interact both in non-neuronal cells and in neurons, which might contribute to our understanding of its pathogenic effects in Parkinson's disease."
28582839	Recent genome-wide association studies have linked common variants in the human genome to Parkinson's disease (PD) risk. Here we show that the consequences of variants at 2 such loci, PARK16 and LRRK2, are highly interrelated, both in terms of their broad impacts on human brain transcriptomes of unaffected carriers, and in terms of their associations with PD risk. Deficiency of the PARK16 locus gene RAB7L1 in primary rodent neurons, or of a RAB7L1 ortholog in Drosophila dopamine neurons, recapitulated degeneration observed with expression of a familial PD mutant form of LRRK2, whereas RAB7L1 overexpression rescued the LRRK2 mutant phenotypes. PD-associated defects in RAB7L1 or LRRK2 led to endolysosomal and Golgi apparatus sorting defects and deficiency of the VPS35 component of the retromer complex. Expression of wild-type VPS35, but not a familial PD-associated mutant form, rescued these defects. Taken together, these studies implicate retromer and lysosomal pathway alterations in PD risk."
28582840	Genetic mutations in leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) have been linked to autosomal dominant Parkinson's disease. The most prevalent mutation, G2019S, results in enhanced LRRK2 kinase activity that potentially contributes to the etiology of Parkinson's disease. Consequently, disease progression is potentially mediated by poorly characterized phosphorylation-dependent LRRK2 substrate pathways. To address this gap in knowledge, we transduced SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma cells with LRRK2 G2019S via adenovirus, then determined quantitative changes in the phosphoproteome upon LRRK2 kinase inhibition (LRRK2-IN-1 treatment) using stable isotope labeling of amino acids in culture combined with phosphopeptide enrichment and LC-MS/MS analysis. We identified 776 phosphorylation sites that were increased or decreased at least 50% in response to LRRK2-IN-1 treatment, including sites on proteins previously known to associate with LRRK2. Bioinformatic analysis of those phosphoproteins suggested a potential role for LRRK2 kinase activity in regulating pro-inflammatory responses and neurite morphology, among other pathways. In follow-up experiments, LRRK2-IN-1 inhibited lipopolysaccharide-induced tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNFα) and C-X-C motif chemokine 10 (CXCL10) levels in astrocytes and also enhanced multiple neurite characteristics in primary neuronal cultures. However, LRRK2-IN-1 had almost identical effects in primary glial and neuronal cultures from LRRK2 knockout mice. These data suggest LRRK2-IN-1 may inhibit pathways of perceived LRRK2 pathophysiological function independently of LRRK2 highlighting the need to use multiple pharmacological tools and genetic approaches in studies determining LRRK2 function."
28582841	Mutations in leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) underlie an autosomal-dominant form of Parkinson's disease (PD) that is clinically indistinguishable from idiopathic PD. The function of LRRK2 is not well understood, but it has become widely accepted that LRRK2 levels or its kinase activity, which is increased by the most commonly observed mutation (G2019S), regulate neurite growth. However, growth has not been measured; it is not known whether mean differences in length correspond to altered rates of growth or retraction, whether axons or dendrites are impacted differentially or whether effects observed are transient or sustained. To address these questions, we compared several developmental milestones in neurons cultured from mice expressing bacterial artificial chromosome transgenes encoding mouse wildtype-LRRK2 or mutant LRRK2-G2019S, Lrrk2 knockout mice and non-transgenic mice. Over the course of three weeks of development on laminin, the data show a sustained, negative effect of LRRK2-G2019S on dendritic growth and arborization, but counter to expectation, dendrites from Lrrk2 knockout mice do not elaborate more rapidly. In contrast, young neurons cultured on a slower growth substrate, poly-L-lysine, show significantly reduced axonal and dendritic motility in Lrrk2 transgenic neurons and significantly increased motility in Lrrk2 knockout neurons with no significant changes in length. Our findings support that LRRK2 can regulate patterns of axonal and dendritic growth, but they also show that effects vary depending on growth substrate and stage of development. Such predictable changes in motility can be exploited in LRRK2 bioassays and guide exploration of LRRK2 function in vivo.
28582842	The most prominent mechanism proposed for death of dopaminergic neurons in Parkinson's disease (PD) is elevated generation of reactive oxygen/nitrogen species (ROS/RNS). Recent studies suggest that ROS produced during PD pathogenesis may contribute to cytotoxicity in cell culture models of PD. We hypothesized that inhibition of ROS production would prevent PD symptoms in the LRRK2(R1441G) transgenic (tg) mouse model of PD. These mice overexpress a mutant form of leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) and are reported to develop PD-like symptoms at approximately 10 months of age. Despite similar expression of the transgene, our colony did not recapitulate the same type of motor dysfunction originally reported. However, tests of motor coordination (pole test, Rotor-Rod) revealed a significant defect in LRRK2(R1441G) mice by 16 months of age.  LRRK2(R1441G) tg mice, or wild type littermates, were given diapocynin (200mg/kg, a proposed NADPH oxidase inhibitor) three times per week by oral gavage starting at 12 weeks of age. Decreased performance on the pole test and Rotor-Rod in the LRRK2(R1441G) mice was prevented with diapocynin treatment. No loss in open field movement or rearing was found. As expected, tyrosine hydroxylase staining was similar in both the substantia nigra and striatum in all treatment groups.  Together these data demonstrate that diapocynin is a viable agent for protection of neurobehavioral function.
28582843	Mutations in the leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) gene cause late-onset Parkinson's disease (PD). Emerging evidence suggests a role for LRRK2 in the endocytic pathway. Here, we show that LRRK2 is released in extracellular microvesicles (i.e. exosomes) from cells that natively express LRRK2. LRRK2 localizes to collecting duct epithelial cells in the kidney that actively secrete exosomes into urine. Purified urinary exosomes contain LRRK2 protein that is both dimerized and phosphorylated. We provide a quantitative proteomic profile of 1673 proteins in urinary exosomes and find that known LRRK2 interactors including 14-3-3 are some of the most abundant exosome proteins. Disruption of the 14-3-3 LRRK2 interaction with a 14-3-3 inhibitor or through acute LRRK2 kinase inhibition potently blocks LRRK2 release in exosomes, but familial mutations in LRRK2 had no effect on secretion. LRRK2 levels were overall comparable but highly variable in urinary exosomes derived from PD cases and age-matched controls, although very high LRRK2 levels were detected in some PD affected cases. We further characterized LRRK2 exosome release in neurons and macrophages in culture, and found that LRRK2-positive exosomes circulate in cerebral spinal fluid (CSF). Together, these results define a pathway for LRRK2 extracellular release, clarify one function of the LRRK2 14-3-3 interaction and provide a foundation for utilization of LRRK2 as a biomarker in clinical trials.
28582844	BACKGROUND: Non-motor symptoms are increasingly recognized as important features of Parkinson's disease (PD). LRRK2 mutations are common causes of familial and sporadic PD. Non-motor features have not been yet comprehensively evaluated in LRRK2 transgenic mouse models. OBJECTIVE: Using a transgenic mouse model overexpressing the R1441G mutation of the human LRRK2 gene, we have investigated the longitudinal correlation between motor and non-motor symptoms and determined if specific non-motor phenotypes precede motor symptoms. METHODOLOGY: We investigated the onset of motor and non-motor phenotypes on the LRRK2(R1441G) BAC transgenic mice and their littermate controls from 4 to 21 month-old using a battery of behavioral tests. The transgenic mutant mice displayed mild hypokinesia in the open field from 16 months old, with gastrointestinal dysfunctions beginning at 6 months old. Non-motor features such as depression and anxiety-like behaviors, sensorial functions (pain sensitivity and olfaction), and learning and memory abilities in the passive avoidance test were similar in the transgenic animals compared to littermate controls. CONCLUSIONS: LRRK2(R1441G) BAC transgenic mice displayed gastrointestinal dysfunction at an early stage but did not have abnormalities in fine behaviors, olfaction, pain sensitivity, mood disorders and learning and memory compared to non-transgenic littermate controls. The observations on olfaction and gastrointestinal dysfunction in this model validate findings in human carriers. These mice did recapitulate mild Parkinsonian motor features at late stages but compensatory mechanisms modulating the progression of PD in these models should be further evaluated."
28582845	Parkinson's disease (PD) is the second most common neurodegenerative disorder behind Alzheimer's disease. There are currently no therapies proven to halt or slow the progressive neuronal cell loss in PD. A better understanding of the molecular and cellular causes of PD is needed to develop disease-modifying therapies. PD is an age-dependent disease that causes the progressive death of dopamine-producing neurons in the brain. Loss of substantia nigra dopaminergic neurons results in locomotor symptoms such as slowness of movement, tremor, rigidity and postural instability. Abnormalities in other neurotransmitters, such as serotonin, may also be involved in both the motor and non-motor symptoms of PD. Most cases of PD are sporadic but many families show a Mendelian pattern of inherited Parkinsonism and causative mutations have been identified in genes such as Parkin, DJ-1, PINK1, alpha-synuclein and leucine rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2).  Although the definitive causes of idiopathic PD remain uncertain, the activity of the antioxidant enzyme glutathione peroxidase 1 (Gpx1) is reduced in PD brains and has been shown to be a key determinant of vulnerability to dopaminergic neuron loss in PD animal models. Furthermore, Gpx1 activity decreases with age in human substantia nigra but not rodent substantia nigra. Therefore, we crossed mice deficient for both Parkin and DJ-1 with mice deficient for Gpx1 to test the hypothesis that loss-of-function mutations in Parkin and DJ-1 cause PD by increasing vulnerability to Gpx1 deficiency. Surprisingly, mice lacking Parkin, DJ-1 and Gpx1 have increased striatal dopamine levels in the absence of nigral cell loss compared to wild type, Gpx1(-/-), and Parkin(-/-)DJ-1(-/-) mutant mice.  Additionally, Parkin(-/-)DJ-1(-/-) mice exhibit improved rotarod performance and have increased serotonin in the striatum and hippocampus. Stereological analysis indicated that the increased serotonin levels were not due to increased serotonergic projections. The results of our behavioral, neurochemical and immunohistochemical analyses reveal that PD-linked mutations in Parkin and DJ-1 cause dysregulation of neurotransmitter systems beyond the nigrostriatal dopaminergic circuit and that loss-of-function mutations in Parkin and DJ-1 lead to adaptive changes in dopamine and serotonin especially in the context of Gpx1 deficiency.
28582846	Mutations in the leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) gene represent the most common genetic cause of Parkinson's disease (PD). However, LRRK2 function and molecular mechanisms causing the parkinsonian phenotype remain widely unknown.  Most of LRRK2 knockdown and overexpression models strengthen the relevance of LRRK2 in regulating neurite outgrowth. We have recently identified ARHGEF7 as the first guanine nucleotide exchange factor (GEF) of LRRK2. This GEF is influencing neurite outgrowth through regulation of actin polymerization. Here, we examined the expression profile of neuroblastoma cells with reduced LRRK2 and ARHGEF7 levels to identify additional partners of LRRK2 in this process. Tropomyosins (TPMs), and in particular TPM4, were the most interesting candidates next to other actin cytoskeleton regulating transcripts in this dataset. Subsequently, enhanced neurite branching was shown using primary hippocampal neurons of LRRK2 knockdown animals. Furthermore, we observed an enhanced number of growth cones per neuron and a mislocalization and dysregulation of ARHGEF7 and TPM4 in these neuronal compartments. Our results reveal a fascinating connection between the neurite outgrowth phenotype of LRRK2 models and the regulation of actin polymerization directing further investigations of LRRK2-related pathogenesis.
28582847	Mutations in leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) are the most common cause of familial Parkinson's disease. We found LRRK2 to be degraded in lysosomes by chaperone-mediated autophagy (CMA), whereas the most common pathogenic mutant form of LRRK2, G2019S, was poorly degraded by this pathway. In contrast to the behavior of typical CMA substrates, lysosomal binding of both wild-type and several pathogenic mutant LRRK2 proteins was enhanced in the presence of other CMA substrates, which interfered with the organization of the CMA translocation complex, resulting in defective CMA. Cells responded to such LRRK2-mediated CMA compromise by increasing levels of the CMA lysosomal receptor, as seen in neuronal cultures and brains of LRRK2 transgenic mice, induced pluripotent stem cell-derived dopaminergic neurons and brains of Parkinson's disease patients with LRRK2 mutations. This newly described LRRK2 self-perpetuating inhibitory effect on CMA could underlie toxicity in Parkinson's disease by compromising the degradation of α-synuclein, another Parkinson's disease-related protein degraded by this pathway."
28582848	The leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) gene was found to play a role in the pathogenesis of both familial and sporadic Parkinson's disease (PD). LRRK2 encodes a large multi-domain protein that is expressed in different tissues. To date, the physiological and pathological functions of LRRK2 are not clearly defined. In this study we have explored the role of LRRK2 in controlling vesicle trafficking in different cellular or animal models and using various readouts. In neuronal cells, the presence of LRRK2(G2019S) pathological mutant determines increased extracellular dopamine levels either under basal conditions or upon nicotine stimulation. Moreover, mutant LRRK2 affects the levels of dopamine receptor D1 on the membrane surface in neuronal cells or animal models.  Ultrastructural analysis of PC12-derived cells expressing mutant LRRK2(G2019S) shows an altered intracellular vesicle distribution. Taken together, our results point to the key role of LRRK2 to control vesicle trafficking in neuronal cells.
28582850	Mutations in LRRK2 cause autosomal dominant Parkinson's disease (PD). LRRK2 encodes a multi-domain protein containing GTPase and kinase domains, and putative protein-protein interaction domains. Familial PD mutations alter the GTPase and kinase activity of LRRK2 in vitro. LRRK2 is suggested to regulate a number of cellular pathways although the underlying mechanisms are poorly understood. To explore such mechanisms, it has proved informative to identify LRRK2-interacting proteins, some of which serve as LRRK2 kinase substrates. Here, we identify common interactions of LRRK2 with members of the dynamin GTPase superfamily.  LRRK2 interacts with dynamin 1-3 that mediate membrane scission in clathrin-mediated endocytosis and with dynamin-related proteins that mediate mitochondrial fission (Drp1) and fusion (mitofusins and OPA1). LRRK2 partially co-localizes with endosomal dynamin-1 or with mitofusins and OPA1 at mitochondrial membranes. The subcellular distribution and oligomeric complexes of dynamin GTPases are not altered by modulating LRRK2 in mouse brain, whereas mature OPA1 levels are reduced in G2019S PD brains. LRRK2 enhances mitofusin-1 GTP binding, whereas dynamin-1 and OPA1 serve as modest substrates of LRRK2-mediated phosphorylation in vitro. While dynamin GTPase orthologs are not required for LRRK2-induced toxicity in yeast, LRRK2 functionally interacts with dynamin-1 and mitofusin-1 in cultured neurons. LRRK2 attenuates neurite shortening induced by dynamin-1 by reducing its levels, whereas LRRK2 rescues impaired neurite outgrowth induced by mitofusin-1 potentially by reversing excessive mitochondrial fusion. Our study elucidates novel functional interactions of LRRK2 with dynamin-superfamily GTPases that implicate LRRK2 in the regulation of membrane dynamics important for endocytosis and mitochondrial morphology.
28582851	Mutations in leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) are the most frequent cause of genetic Parkinson's disease (PD). The biological function of LRRK2 and how mutations lead to disease remain poorly defined. It has been proposed that LRRK2 could function in gene transcription regulation; however, this issue remains controversial. Here, we investigated in parallel gene and microRNA (miRNA) transcriptome profiles of three different LRRK2 mouse models. Striatal tissue was isolated from adult LRRK2 knockout (KO) mice, as well as mice expressing human LRRK2 wildtype (hLRRK2-WT) or the PD-associated R1441G mutation (hLRRK2-R1441G).  We identified a total of 761 genes and 24 miRNAs that were misregulated in the absence of LRRK2 when a false discovery rate of 0.2 was applied. Notably, most changes in gene expression were modest (i.e., <2 fold). By real-time quantitative RT-PCR, we confirmed the variations of selected genes (e.g., adra2, syt2, opalin) and miRNAs (e.g., miR-16, miR-25). Surprisingly, little or no changes in gene expression were observed in mice expressing hLRRK2-WT or hLRRK2-R1441G when compared to non-transgenic controls. Nevertheless, a number of miRNAs were misexpressed in these models. Bioinformatics analysis identified several miRNA-dependent and independent networks dysregulated in LRRK2-deficient mice, including PD-related pathways. These results suggest that brain LRRK2 plays an overall modest role in gene transcription regulation in mammals; however, these effects seem context and RNA type-dependent. Our data thus set the stage for future investigations regarding LRRK2 function in PD development.
28582852	Leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) is enriched in the striatal projectionneurons (SPNs). We found that LRRK2 negatively regulates protein kinase A (PKA)activity in the SPNs during synaptogenesis and in response to dopamine receptorDrd1 activation. LRRK2 interacted with PKA regulatory subunit IIβ (PKARIIβ). Alack of LRRK2 promoted the synaptic translocation of PKA and increasedPKA-mediated phosphorylation of actin-disassembling enzyme cofilin and glutamate receptor GluR1, resulting in abnormal synaptogenesis and transmission in thedeveloping SPNs. Furthermore, PKA-dependent phosphorylation of GluR1 was alsoaberrantly enhanced in the striatum of young and aged Lrrk2(-/-) mice aftertreatment with a Drd1 agonist. Notably, a Parkinson's disease-related Lrrk2R1441C missense mutation that impaired the interaction of LRRK2 with PKARIIβ alsoinduced excessive PKA activity in the SPNs. Our findings reveal a previouslyunknown regulatory role for LRRK2 in PKA signaling and suggest a pathogenicmechanism of SPN dysfunction in Parkinson's disease."
28582853	Increasing evidence suggests that Parkinson's disease (PD)-linked Leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) has a role in peripheral and brain-resident immune cells.  Furthermore, dysregulation of the anti-inflammatory, neurotrophic protein progranulin (PGRN) has been demonstrated in several chronic neurodegenerative diseases. Here we show that PGRN levels are significantly reduced in conditioned medium of LRRK2(R1441G) mutant mouse fibroblasts, leukocytes, and microglia, whereas levels of proinflammatory factors, like interleukin-1β and keratinocyte-derived chemokine, were significantly increased. Decreased PGRN levels were also detected in supernatants of cultured human fibroblasts isolated from presymptomatic LRRK2(G2019S) mutation carriers, while mitochondrial function was unaffected. Furthermore, medium levels of matrix metalloprotease (MMP) 2 increased, whereas MMP 9 decreased in LRRK2(R1441G) mutant microglia. Increased proteolytic cleavage of the MMP substrates ICAM-5 and α-synuclein in synaptoneurosomes from LRRK2(R1441G) mutant mouse brain indicates increased net synaptic MMP activity. PGRN levels were decreased in the cerebrospinal fluid of presymptomatic LRRK2 mutant mice, whereas PGRN levels were increased in aged symptomatic mutant mice. Notably, PGRN levels were also increased in the cerebrospinal fluid of PD patients carrying LRRK2 mutations, but not in idiopathic PD patients and in healthy control donors. Our data suggest that proinflammatory activity of peripheral and brain-resident immune cells may particularly contribute to the early stages of Parkinson's disease caused by LRRK2 mutations."
28582854	Twelve- to sixteen-month-old (G2019S) LRRK2 transgenic mice prepared by us displayed progressive neuronal death of substantia nigra pars compacta (SNpc) dopaminergic cells. In the present study, we hypothesized that prior to a late-phase death of SNpc dopaminergic neurons, (G2019S) LRRK2 also causes an early-phase neuronal dysfunction of SNpc dopaminergic cells in the (G2019S) LRRK2 mouse. Eight to nine-month-old (G2019S) LRRK2 transgenic mice exhibited the symptom of hypoactivity in the absence of the degeneration of SNpc dopaminergic neurons or nigrostriatal dopaminergic terminals. Whole-cell current-clamp recordings of SNpc dopaminergic cells in brain slices demonstrated a significant decrease in spontaneous firing frequency of SNpc dopaminergic neurons of 8-month-old (G2019S) LRRK2 mice. Carbon fiber electrode amperometry recording using striatal slices showed that (G2019S) LRRK2 transgenic mice at the age of 8 to 9months display an impaired evoked dopamine release in the dorsolateral striatum. Normal nigrostriatal dopaminergic transmission is required for the induction of long-term synaptic plasticity expressed at corticostriatal glutamatergic synapses of striatal medium spiny neurons. Whole-cell voltage-clamp recordings showed that in contrast to medium spiny neurons of 8 to 9-month-old wild-type mice, high-frequency stimulation of corticostriatal afferents failed to induce long-term depression (LTD) of corticostriatal EPSCs in medium spiny neurons of (G2019S) LRRK2 mice at the same age. Our study provides the evidence that mutant (G2019S) LRRK2 causes early-phase dysfunctions of SNpc dopaminergic neurons, including a decrease in spontaneous firing rate and a reduction in evoked dopamine release, and impairment of corticostriatal LTD in the (G2019S) LRRK2 transgenic mouse.
28582855	Mutations in Leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 gene (LRRK2) are associated with familial and sporadic Parkinson's disease (PD). LRRK2 is a complex protein that consists of multiple domains executing several functions, including GTP hydrolysis, kinase activity, and protein binding. Robust evidence suggests that LRRK2 acts at the synaptic site as a molecular hub connecting synaptic vesicles to cytoskeletal elements via a complex panel of protein-protein interactions.  Here we investigated the impact of pharmacological inhibition of LRRK2 kinase activity on synaptic function. Acute treatment with LRRK2 inhibitors reduced the frequency of spontaneous currents, the rate of synaptic vesicle trafficking and the release of neurotransmitter from isolated synaptosomes. The investigation of complementary models lacking LRRK2 expression allowed us to exclude potential off-side effects of kinase inhibitors on synaptic functions. Next we studied whether kinase inhibition affects LRRK2 heterologous interactions. We found that the binding among LRRK2, presynaptic proteins and synaptic vesicles is affected by kinase inhibition. Our results suggest that LRRK2 kinase activity influences synaptic vesicle release via modulation of LRRK2 macro-molecular complex.
28582856	Mutations in the leucine-rich repeat kinase-2 (LRRK2) gene cause autosomal-dominant Parkinson's disease (PD) and contribute to sporadic PD. LRRK2 contains Guanosine-5'-triphosphate (GTP) binding, GTPase and kinase activities that have been implicated in the neuronal degeneration of PD pathogenesis, making LRRK2, a potential drug target. To date, there is no disease-modifying drug to slow the neuronal degeneration of PD and no published LRRK2 GTP domain inhibitor.  Here, the biological functions of two novel GTP-binding inhibitors of LRRK2 were examined in PD cell and mouse models. Through a combination of computer-aided drug design (CADD) and LRRK2 bio-functional screens, two novel compounds, 68: and 70: , were shown to reduce LRRK2 GTP binding and to inhibit LRRK2 kinase activity in vitro and in cultured cell assays. Moreover, these two compounds attenuated neuronal degeneration in human SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma cells and mouse primary neurons expressing mutant LRRK2 variants. Although both compounds inhibited LRRK2 kinase activity and reduced neuronal degeneration, solubility problems with 70: prevented further testing in mice. Thus, only 68: was tested in a LRRK2-based lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced pre-inflammatory mouse model. 68: reduced LRRK2 GTP-binding activity and kinase activity in brains of LRRK2 transgenic mice after intraperitoneal injection. Moreover, LPS induced LRRK2 upregulation and microglia activation in mouse brains. These findings suggest that disruption of GTP binding to LRRK2 represents a potential novel therapeutic approach for PD intervention and that these novel GTP-binding inhibitors provide both tools and lead compounds for future drug development.
28582857	The leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 mutation G2019S in the kinase-domain is the most common genetic cause of Parkinson's disease. To investigate the impact of the G2019S mutation on motor activity in vivo, a longitudinal phenotyping approach was developed in knock-in (KI) mice bearing this kinase-enhancing mutation. Two cohorts of G2019S KI mice and wild-type littermates (WT) were subjected to behavioral tests, specific for akinesia, bradykinesia and overall gait ability, at different ages (3, 6, 10, 15 and 19months). The motor performance of G2019S KI mice remained stable up to the age of 19months and did not show the typical age-related decline in immobility time and stepping activity of WT. Several lines of evidence suggest that enhanced LRRK2 kinase activity is the main contributor to the observed hyperkinetic phenotype of G2019S KI mice: i) KI mice carrying a LRRK2 kinase-dead mutation (D1994S KD) showed a similar progressive motor decline as WT; ii) two LRRK2 kinase inhibitors, H-1152 and Nov-LRRK2-11, acutely reversed the hyperkinetic phenotype of G2019S KI mice, while being ineffective in WT or D1994S KD animals. LRRK2 target engagement in vivo was further substantiated by reduction of LRRK2 phosphorylation at Ser935 in the striatum and cortex at efficacious doses of Nov-LRRK2-11, and in the striatum at efficacious doses of H-1152. In summary, expression of the G2019S mutation in the mouse LRRK2 gene confers a hyperkinetic phenotype that is resistant to age-related motor decline, likely via enhancement of LRRK2 kinase activity. This study provides an in vivo model to investigate the effects of LRRK2 inhibitors on motor function.
28582858	Mutations in the leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) gene cause late-onset, autosomal dominant Parkinson's disease (PD). The clinical and neurochemical features of LRRK2-linked PD are similar to idiopathic disease although neuropathology is somewhat heterogeneous. Dominant mutations in LRRK2 precipitate neurodegeneration through a toxic gain-of-function mechanism which can be modeled in transgenic mice overexpressing human LRRK2 variants. A number of LRRK2 transgenic mouse models have been developed that display abnormalities in dopaminergic neurotransmission and alterations in tau metabolism yet without consistently inducing dopaminergic neurodegeneration. To directly explore the impact of mutant LRRK2 on the nigrostriatal dopaminergic pathway, we developed conditional transgenic mice that selectively express human R1441C LRRK2 in dopaminergic neurons from the endogenous murine ROSA26 promoter. The expression of R1441C LRRK2 does not induce the degeneration of substantia nigra dopaminergic neurons or striatal dopamine deficits in mice up to 2years of age, and fails to precipitate abnormal protein inclusions containing alpha-synuclein, tau, ubiquitin or autophagy markers (LC3 and p62). Furthermore, mice expressing R1441C LRRK2 exhibit normal motor activity and olfactory function with increasing age.  Intriguingly, the expression of R1441C LRRK2 induces age-dependent abnormalities of the nuclear envelope in nigral dopaminergic neurons including reduced nuclear circularity and increased invaginations of the nuclear envelope. In addition, R1441C LRRK2 mice display increased neurite complexity of cultured midbrain dopaminergic neurons. Collectively, these novel R1441C LRRK2 conditional transgenic mice reveal altered dopaminergic neuronal morphology with advancing age, and provide a useful tool for exploring the pathogenic mechanisms underlying the R1441C LRRK2 mutation in PD.
28582859	Leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) has been associated with Parkinson's disease(PD) and other disorders. However, its normal physiological functions andpathogenic properties remain elusive. Here we show that LRRK2 regulates theanterograde ER-Golgi transport through anchoring Sec16A at the endoplasmicreticulum exit sites (ERES). LRRK2 interacted and co-localized with Sec16A, a keyprotein in the formation of ERES. Lrrk2 depletion caused a dispersion of Sec16Afrom ERES and impaired ER export. In neurons, LRRK2 and Sec16A showed extensiveco-localization at the dendritic ERES (dERES) that locally regulate the transportof proteins to the dendritic spines. A loss of Lrrk2 affected the association of Sec16A with dERES and impaired the activity-dependent targeting of glutamatereceptors onto the cell/synapse surface. Furthermore, the PD-related LRRK2 R1441Cmissense mutation in the GTPase domain interfered with the interaction of LRRK2with Sec16A and also affected ER-Golgi transport, while LRRK2 kinase activity wasnot required for these functions. Therefore, our findings reveal a newphysiological function of LRRK2 in ER-Golgi transport, suggesting ERESdysfunction may contribute to the pathogenesis of PD."
28582860	Recently, we demonstrated that dimeric apocynin prevented loss of motor function in the leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2(R1441G)) transgenic (tg) mouse (treated with 200mg/kg, three times per week) [B.P. Dranka et al., Neurosci.  Lett. 549 (2013) 57-62]. Here we extend those studies by treating LRRK2(R1441G) mice with an orally-available, mitochondrially-targeted apocynin derivative. We hypothesized that the increased mitochondrial permeability of Mito-apocynin, due to the triphenylphosphonium moiety, would allow improvement of Parkinson's disease (PD) symptoms at lower doses than those required for diapocynin. Tests of motor coordination (pole test, Rotor-Rod) revealed a significant deficit in coordinated motor function in LRRK2(R1441G) mice by 15 months of age. Decreased performance on the pole test and Rotor-Rod in the LRRK2(R1441G) mice was prevented with Mito-apocynin treatment (3mg/kg, three times per week). Decreased olfactory function is an early indication of PD in human patients. LRRK2(R1441G) tg mice displayed deficits in sense of smell in both the hidden treat test, and a radial arm maze test. Interestingly, treatment with Mito-apocynin prevented this hyposmia, and animals retained normal ability to identify either a scented treat or a food pellet as well as wild type littermates. Together, these data demonstrate that the mitochondria-targeted apocynin analog is effective in preventing early PD-like symptoms in the LRRK2(R1441G) mouse model.
28582861	Converging evidence suggests that the Parkinson's disease-linked leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) modulates cellular function by regulating actin dynamics. In the present study we investigate the role of LRRK2 in functional synaptic terminals of adult LRRK2-knockout and LRRK2(R1441G)-transgenic mice as well as in primary fibroblasts of LRRK2(G2019S) mutation carriers. We show that lack of LRRK2decreases and overexpression of mutant LRRK2 age-dependently increases the effect of the actin depolymerizing agent Latrunculin A (LatA) on the synaptic cytoskeleton. Similarly, endogenous mutant LRRK2 increases sensitivity to LatA in primary fibroblasts. Under basal conditions however, these fibroblasts show an increase in F-actin bundles and a decrease in filopodial length which can be rescued by LatA treatment. Our data suggest that LRRK2 alters actin dynamics and F-actin structure both in brain neurons and skin fibroblasts. We hypothesize that increased F-actin bundling represents a compensatory mechanism to protect F-actin from the depolymerizing effect of mutant LRRK2 under basal conditions. Our data further indicate that LRRK2-dependent changes in the cytoskeleton might have functional consequences on postsynaptic NMDA receptor localization."
28582862	Mutations in Leucine-Rich Repeat Kinase-2 (LRRK2) result in familial Parkinson's disease and the G2019S mutation alone accounts for up to 30% in some ethnicities. Despite this, the function of LRRK2 is largely undetermined although evidence suggests roles in phosphorylation, protein interactions, autophagy and endocytosis. Emerging reports link loss of LRRK2 to altered synaptic transmission, but the effects of the G2019S mutation upon synaptic release in mammalian neurons are unknown. To assess wild type and mutant LRRK2 in established neuronal networks, we conducted immunocytochemical, electrophysiological and biochemical characterization of >3 week old corticalcultures of LRRK2 knock-out, wild-type overexpressing and G2019S knock-in mice. Synaptic release and synapse numbers were grossly normal in LRRK2 knock-out cells, but discretely reduced glutamatergic activity and reduced synaptic protein levels were observed. Conversely, synapse density was modestly but significantly increased in wild-type LRRK2 overexpressing cultures although event frequency was not. In knock-in cultures, glutamate release was markedly elevated, in the absence of any change to synapse density, indicating that physiological levels of G2019S LRRK2 elevate probability of release. Several pre-synaptic regulatory proteins shown by others to interact with LRRK2 were expressed at normal levels in knock-in cultures; however, synapsin 1 phosphorylation was significantly reduced. Thus, perturbations to the pre-synaptic release machinery and elevated synaptic transmission are early neuronal effects of LRRK2 G2019S. Furthermore, the comparison of knock-in and overexpressing cultures suggests that one copy of the G2019S mutation has a more pronounced effect than an ~3-fold increase in LRRK2 protein. Mutant-induced increases in transmission may convey additional stressors to neuronal physiology that may eventually contribute to the pathogenesis of Parkinson's disease."
28582863	Mutations in leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (Lrrk2) are the most common genetic cause of Parkinson's disease (PD), a neurodegenerative disorder affecting 1-2% of those >65 years old. The neurophysiology of LRRK2 remains largely elusive, although protein loss suggests a role in glutamatergic synapse transmission and overexpression studies show altered dopamine release in aged mice. We show that glutamate transmission is unaltered onto striatal projection neurons (SPNs) of adult LRRK2 knockout mice and that adult animals exhibit no detectable cognitive or motor deficits. Basal synaptic transmission is also unaltered in SPNs of LRRK2 overexpressing mice, but they do exhibit clear alterations to D2-receptor-mediated short-term synaptic plasticity, behavioral hypoactivity and impaired recognition memory. These phenomena are associated with decreased striatal dopamine tone and abnormal dopamine- and cAMP-regulated phosphoprotein 32 kDa signal integration. The data suggest that LRRK2 acts at the nexus of dopamine and glutamate signaling in the adult striatum, where it regulates dopamine levels, presynaptic glutamate release via D2-dependent synaptic plasticity and dopamine-receptor signal transduction."
28582864	Leucine rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) has been genetically linked to Parkinson's disease (PD) by genome-wide association studies (GWAS). The most common LRRK2 mutation, G2019S, which is relatively rare in the total population, gives rise to increased kinase activity. As such, LRRK2 kinase inhibitors are potentially useful in the treatment of PD. We herein disclose the discovery and optimization of a novel series of potent LRRK2 inhibitors, focusing on improving kinome selectivity using a surrogate crystallography approach. This resulted in the identification of 14 (PF-06447475), a highly potent, brain penetrant and selective LRRK2 inhibitor which has been further profiled in in vivo safety and pharmacodynamic studies.
28582865	OBJECTIVE: Mutations in leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) pose a significant genetic risk in familial and sporadic Parkinson's disease (PD). R1441 mutation (R1441G/C) in its GTPase domain is found in familial PD. How LRRK2 interacts with synaptic proteins, and its role in dopamine (DA) homeostasis and synaptic vesicle recycling remain unclear.  METHODS: To explore the pathogenic effects of LRRK2(R1441G) mutation on nigrostriatal synaptic nerve terminals and locomotor activity, we generated C57BL/6N mice with homozygous LRRK2(R1441G) knockin (KI) mutation, and examined for early changes in nigrostriatal region, striatal synaptosomal [(3)H]-DA uptake and locomotor activity after reserpine-induced DA depletion.  RESULTS: Under normal conditions, mutant mice showed no differences, (1) in amount and morphology of nigrostriatal DA neurons and neurites, (2) tyrosine hydroxylase (TH), DA uptake transporter (DAT), vesicular monoamine transporter-2 (VMAT2) expression in striatum, (3) COX IV, LC3B, Beclin-1 expression in midbrain, (4) LRRK2 expression in total cell lysate from whole brain, (5) α-synuclein, ubiquitin, and tau protein immunostaining in midbrain, (6) locomotor activity, compared to wild-type controls. However, after a single intraperitoneal reserpine dose, striatal synaptosomes from young 3-month-old mutant mice demonstrated significantly lower DA uptake with impaired locomotor activity and significantly slower recovery from the effects of reserpine.  INTERPRETATION: Although no abnormal phenotype was observed in mutant LRRK2(R1441G) mice, the KI mutation increases vulnerability to reserpine-induced striatal DA depletion and perturbed DA homeostasis resulting in presynaptic dysfunction and locomotor deficits with impaired recovery from reserpine. This subtle nigrostriatal synaptic vulnerability may reflect one of the earliest pathogenic processes in LRRK2-associated PD.
28582866	Leucine-rich repeat kinase (LRRK2) is the causal molecule of autosomal dominant Parkinson's disease (PD). We previously reported that intracellular degradation of wild-type (WT) LRRK2 is promoted by formation of heterodimers with the I2020T mutant LRRK2. In the present study, we investigated whether this is also the case for mouse/human cross-species heterodimers, which could be formed in transgenic mice. First, by co-transfection and immunoprecipitation, we identified the cross-species heterodimer of mouse LRRK2 and human LRRK2. Next, we found that the protein level of mouse LRRK2 decreased when co-transfected with human I2020T LRRK2, but not with human WT LRRK2. These results suggested that degradation of mouse LRRK2 was promoted by formation of a cross-species heterodimer with the mutant LRRK2. In I2020T LRRK2-transgenic mice, the lower protein level of brain LRRK2 in comparison with control mice, together with higher expression of the mRNA, suggested that endogenous LRRK2 was degraded by formation of cross-species heterodimers. Our results suggest a new concept of cross-species dimer/oligomer formation in transgenic disease-model mice.
28582867	Gene variants of the leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) are associated with susceptibility to Parkinson's disease (PD). Besides brain and periphery, LRRK2 is expressed in various immune cells including dendritic cells (DCs), antigen-presenting cells linking innate and adaptive immunity. However, the function of LRRK2 in the immune system is still incompletely understood. Here, Ca(2+)-signaling was analyzed in DCs isolated from gene-targeted mice lacking lrrk2 (Lrrk2(-/-)) and their wild-type littermates (Lrrk2(+/+)). According to Western blotting, Lrrk2 was expressed in Lrrk2(+/+) DCs but not in Lrrk2(-/-)DCs.  Cytosolic Ca(2+) levels ([Ca(2+)]i) were determined utilizing Fura-2 fluorescence and whole cell currents to decipher electrogenic transport. The increase of [Ca(2+)]i following inhibition of sarcoendoplasmatic Ca(2+)-ATPase with thapsigargin (1 µM) in the absence of extracellular Ca(2+) (Ca(2+)-release) and the increase of [Ca(2+)]i following subsequent readdition of extracellular Ca(2+) (SOCE) were both significantly larger in Lrrk2(-/-) than in Lrrk2(+/+) DCs. The augmented increase of [Ca(2+)]i could have been due to impaired Ca(2+) extrusion by K(+)-independent (NCX) and/or K(+)-dependent (NCKX) Na(+)/Ca(2+)-exchanger activity, which was thus determined from the increase of [Ca(2+)]i, (Δ[Ca(2+)]i), and current following abrupt replacement of Na(+) containing (130 mM) and Ca(2+) free (0 mM) extracellular perfusate by Na(+) free (0 mM) and Ca(2+) containing (2 mM) extracellular perfusate. As a result, both slope and peak of Δ[Ca(2+)]i as well as Na(+)/Ca(2+) exchanger-induced current were significantly lower in Lrrk2(-/-) than in Lrrk2(+/+) DCs. A 6 or 24 hour treatment with the LRRK2 inhibitor GSK2578215A (1 µM) significantly decreased NCX1 and NCKX1 transcript levels, significantly blunted Na(+)/Ca(2+)-exchanger activity, and significantly augmented the increase of [Ca(2+)]i following Ca(2+)-release and SOCE. In conclusion, the present observations disclose a completely novel functional significance of LRRK2, i.e., the up-regulation of Na(+)/Ca(2+) exchanger transcription and activity leading to attenuation of Ca(2+)-signals in DCs.
28582868	Mutations within the LRRK2 gene have been identified in Parkinson's disease (PD) patients and have been implicated in the dysfunction of several cellular pathways. Here, we explore how pathogenic mutations and the inhibition of LRRK2 kinase activity affect cytoskeleton dynamics in mouse and human cell systems. We generated and characterized a novel transgenic mouse model expressing physiological levels of human wild type and G2019S-mutant LRRK2. No neuronal loss or neurodegeneration was detected in midbrain dopamine neurons at the age of 12 months. Postnatal hippocampal neurons derived from transgenic mice showed no alterations in the seven parameters examined concerning neurite outgrowth sampled automatically on several hundred neurons using high content imaging. Treatment with the kinase inhibitor LRRK2-IN-1 resulted in no significant changes in the neurite outgrowth. In human fibroblasts we analyzed whether pathogenic LRRK2 mutations change cytoskeleton functions such as cell adhesion. To this end we compared the adhesion characteristics of human skin fibroblasts derived from six PD patients carrying one of three different pathogenic LRRK2 mutations and from four age-matched control individuals. The mutant LRRK2 variants as well as the inhibition of LRRK2 kinase activity did not reveal any significant cell adhesion differences in cultured fibroblasts. In summary, our results in both human and mouse cell systems suggest that neither the expression of wild type or mutant LRRK2, nor the inhibition of LRRK2 kinase activity affect neurite complexity and cellular adhesion.
28582869	Leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) is the single most common genetic cause of both familial and sporadic Parkinson's disease (PD), both of which share pathogenetic and neurologic similarities with human immunodeficiency virus 1 (HIV-1)-associated neurocognitive disorders (HAND). Pathologic LRRK2 activity may also contribute to neuroinflammation, because microglia lacking LRRK2 exposed to proinflammatory stimuli have attenuated responses. Because microglial activation is a hallmark of HIV-1 neuropathology, we have investigated the role of LRRK2 activation using in vitro and in vivo models of HAND. We hypothesize that LRRK2 is a key modulator of microglial inflammatory responses, which play a pathogenic role in both HAND and PD, and that these responses may cause or exacerbate neuronal damage in these diseases. The HIV-1 Tat protein is a potent neurotoxin produced during HAND that induces activation of primary microglia in culture and long-lasting neuroinflammation and neurotoxicity when injected into the CNS of mice. We found that LRRK2 inhibition attenuates Tat-induced pS935-LRRK2 expression, proinflammatory cytokine and chemokine expression, and phosphorylated p38 and Jun N-terminal kinase signaling in primary microglia. In our murine model, cortical Tat injection in LRRK2 knock-out (KO) mice results in significantly diminished neuronal damage, as assessed by microtubule-associated protein 2 (MAP2), class III β-tubulin TUJ1, synapsin-1, VGluT, and cleaved caspase-3 immunostaining. Furthermore, Tat-injected LRRK2 KO animals have decreased infiltration of peripheral neutrophils, and the morphology of microglia from these mice were similar to that of vehicle-injected controls. We conclude that pathologic activation of LRRK2 regulates a significant component of the neuroinflammation associated with HAND.
28582870	Mutations in the LRRK2 gene represent the most common genetic cause of late onset Parkinson's disease. The physiological and pathological roles of LRRK2 are yet to be fully determined but evidence points towards LRRK2 mutations causing a gain in kinase function, impacting on neuronal maintenance, vesicular dynamics and neurotransmitter release. To explore the role of physiological levels of mutant LRRK2, we created knock-in (KI) mice harboring the most common LRRK2 mutation G2019S in their own genome. We have performed comprehensive dopaminergic, behavioral and neuropathological analyses in this model up to 24months of age. We find elevated kinase activity in the brain of both heterozygous and homozygous mice. Although normal at 6months, by 12months of age, basal and pharmacologically induced extracellular release of dopamine is impaired in both heterozygous and homozygous mice, corroborating previous findings in transgenic models over-expressing mutant LRRK2. Via in vivo microdialysis measurement of basal and drug-evoked extracellular release of dopamine and its metabolites, our findings indicate that exocytotic release from the vesicular pool is impaired.  Furthermore, profound mitochondrial abnormalities are evident in the striatum of older homozygous G2019S KI mice, which are consistent with mitochondrial fission arrest. We anticipate that this G2019S mouse line will be a useful pre-clinical model for further evaluation of early mechanistic events in LRRK2 pathogenesis and for second-hit approaches to model disease progression.
28582871	Mutations in leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) are the most common cause of autosomal-dominant forms of Parkinson's disease. LRRK2 is a modular, multidomain protein containing 2 enzymatic domains, including a kinase domain, as well as several protein-protein interaction domains, pointing to a role in cellular signaling. Although enormous efforts have been made, the exact pathophysiologic mechanisms of LRRK2 are still not completely known. In this study, we used a chemical genetics approach to identify LRRK2 substrates from mouse brain. This approach allows the identification of substrates of 1 particular kinase in a complex cellular environment. Several of the identified peptides are involved in the regulation of microtubule (MT) dynamics, including microtubule-associating protein (MAP)/microtubule affinity-regulating kinase 1 (MARK1). MARK1 is a serine/threonine kinase known to phosphorylate MT-binding proteins such as Tau, MAP2, and MAP4 at KXGS motifs leading to MT destabilization. In vitro kinase assays and metabolic-labeling experiments in living cells confirmed MARK1 as an LRRK2 substrate. Moreover, we also showed that LRRK2 and MARK1 are interacting in eukaryotic cells. Our findings contribute to the identification of physiologic LRRK2 substrates and point to a potential mechanism explaining the reported effects of LRRK2 on neurite morphology.
28582872	14-3-3 proteins are key regulators of cell survival. We have previously demonstrated that 14-3-3 levels are decreased in an alpha-synuclein (αsyn) mouse model of Parkinson's disease (PD), and that overexpression of certain 14-3-3 isoforms is protective in several PD models. Here we examine whether changes in 14-3-3 phosphorylation may contribute to the neurodegenerative process in PD. We examine three key 14-3-3 phosphorylation sites that normally regulate 14-3-3 function, including serine 58 (S58), serine 184 (S184), and serine/threonine 232 (S/T232), in several models of PD and in human PD brain. We observed that an increase in S232 phosphorylation is observed in rotenone-treated neuroblastoma cells, in cells overexpressing αsyn, and in human PD brains. Alterations in S58 phosphorylation were less consistent in these models, and we did not observe any phosphorylation changes at S184. Phosphorylation at S232 induced by rotenone is reduced by casein kinase inhibitors, and is not dependent on αsyn. Mutation of the S232 site affected 14-3-3θ's neuroprotective effects against rotenone and 1-methyl-4-phenylpyridinium (MPP(+)), with the S232D mutant lacking any protective effect compared to wildtype or S232A 14-3-3θ. The S232D mutant partially reduced the ability of 14-3-3θ to inhibit Bax activation in response to rotenone. Based on these findings, we propose that phosphorylation of 14-3-3s at serine 232 contributes to the neurodegenerative process in PD.
28582873	Activating mutations in the leucine rich repeat protein kinase 2 (LRRK2) gene are the most common cause of inherited Parkinson's disease (PD). LRRK2 is phosphorylated on a cluster of phosphosites including Ser(910), Ser(935), Ser(955) and Ser(973), which are dephosphorylated in several PD-related LRRK2 mutants (N1437H, R1441C/G, Y1699C and I2020T) linking the regulation of these sites to PD. These serine residues are also dephosphorylated after kinase inhibition and lose 14-3-3 binding, which serves as a pharmacodynamic marker for inhibited LRRK2. Loss of 14-3-3 binding is well established, but the consequences of dephosphorylation are only now being uncovered. In the present study, we found that potent and selective inhibition of LRRK2 kinase activity leads to dephosphorylation of Ser(935) then ubiquitination and degradation of a significant fraction of LRRK2. GNE1023 treatment decreased the phosphorylation and stability of LRRK2 in expression systems and endogenous LRRK2 in A549 cells and in mouse dosing studies. We next established that LRRK2 is ubiquitinated through at least Lys(48) and Lys(63) ubiquitin linkages in response to inhibition. To investigate the link between dephosphorylation induced by inhibitor treatment and LRRK2 ubiquitination, we studied LRRK2 in conditions where it is dephosphorylated such as expression of PD mutants [R1441G, Y1699C and I2020T] or by blocking 14-3-3 binding to LRRK2 via difopein expression, and found LRRK2 is hyper-ubiquitinated. Calyculin A treatment prevents inhibitor and PD mutant induced dephosphorylation and reverts LRRK2 to a lesser ubiquitinated species, thus directly implicating phosphatase activity in LRRK2 ubiquitination.  This dynamic dephosphorylation-ubiquitination cycle could explain detrimental loss-of-function phenotypes found in peripheral tissues of LRRK2 kinase inactive mutants, LRRK2 KO (knockout) animals and following LRRK2 inhibitor administration.
28582874	Axonal swellings are histological hallmarks of axonopathies in various types of disorders in the central nervous system, including neurodegenerative diseases.  Given the pivotal role of axonopathies during the early phase of neurodegenerative process, axonal swellings may be good models which may provide some clues for early pathogenesis of α-synucleinopathies, including Parkinson's disease and dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB). In this mini-review, such a possibility is discussed based on our recent studies as well as other accumulating studies. Consistent with the current view that dysfunction in the autophagy-lysosomal system may play a major role in the formation of axonal swellings, our studies showed globule, small axonal swellings, derived from transgenic mice expressing either human wild-type α-synuclein (αS-globule) or DLB-linked P123H β-synuclein (βS-globule), contained autophagosome-like membranes. However, other pathological features, such as abnormal mitochondria, enhanced oxidative stress and LRRK2 accumulation, were observed in the αS-globules, but not in the βS-globules. Collectively, it is predicted that αS and βS may be involved in axonopathies through similar but distinct mechanisms, and thus, contribute to diverse axonal pathologies. Further studies of the axonal swellings may lead to elucidating the pathogenic mechanism of early α-synucleinopathies and illuminating a strategy for a disease-modifying therapy against these devastating disorders.
28582875	Activating mutations in leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) are present in a subset of Parkinson's disease (PD) patients and may represent an attractive therapeutic target. Here we report a 2-anilino-4-methylamino-5-chloropyrrolopyrimidine, JH-II-127 (18), as a potent and selective inhibitor of both wild-type and G2019S mutant LRRK2. Compound 18 substantially inhibits Ser910 and Ser935 phosphorylation of both wild-type LRRK2 and G2019S mutant at a concentration of 0.1-0.3 μM in a variety of cell types and is capable of inhibiting Ser935 phosphorylation in mouse brain following oral delivery of doses as low as 30 mg/kg.
28582876	Preferential dysfunction/degeneration of midbrain substantia nigra pars compacta (SNpc) dopaminergic (DA) neurons contributes to the main movement symptoms manifested in Parkinson's disease (PD). Although the Leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) G2019S missense mutation (LRRK2 G2019S) is the most common causative genetic factor linked to PD, the effects of LRRK2 G2019S on the function and survival of SNpc DA neurons are poorly understood. Using a binary gene expression system, we generated transgenic mice expressing either wild-type human LRRK2 (WT mice) or the LRRK2 G2019S mutation (G2019S mice) selectively in the midbrain DA neurons. Here we show that overexpression of LRRK2 G2019S did not induce overt motor abnormalities or substantial SNpc DA neuron loss. However, the LRRK2 G2019S mutation impaired dopamine homeostasis and release in aged mice. This reduction in dopamine content/release coincided with the degeneration of DA axon terminals and decreased expression of DA neuron-enriched genes tyrosine hydroxylase (TH), vesicular monoamine transporter 2, dopamine transporter and aldehyde dehydrogenase 1. These factors are responsible for dopamine synthesis, transport and degradation, and their expression is regulated by transcription factor paired-like homeodomain 3 (PITX3). Levels of Pitx3 mRNA and protein were similarly decreased in the SNpc DA neurons of aged G2019S mice. Together, these findings suggest that PITX3-dependent transcription regulation could be one of the many potential mechanisms by which LRRK2 G2019S acts in SNpc DA neurons, resulting in downregulation of its downstream target genes critical for dopamine homeostasis and release.
28582877	Mutations in the gene for LRRK2 are the most common cause of familial Parkinson's disease (PD) and patients with these mutations manifest clinical features that are indistinguishable from those of the more common sporadic form. Thus, investigations of disease mechanisms based on disease-causing LRRK2 mutations can be expected to shed light on the more common sporadic form as well as the inherited form. We have shown that as human BAC transgenic hLRRK2(R1441G) mice age, they exhibit two abnormalities in the nigrostriatal dopaminergic system: an axonopathy and a diminished number of dendrites in the substantia nigra (SN). To better understand disease mechanisms it is useful to determine where in the affected neural system the pathology first begins. We therefore examined the nigrostriatal dopaminergic system in young mice to determine the initial site of pathology. Brains from hLRRK2(R1441G) and littermate control mice at 2-4months of age were examined by immunohistochemistry, anterograde fluorescent axon labeling and ultrastructural analysis. SN neurons, their projecting axons and the striatal terminal fields were assessed. The first identifiable abnormality in this system is an axonopathy characterized by giant polymorphic axon spheroids, the presence of intra-axonal autophagic vacuoles and intra-axonal myelin invagination. An initial involvement of axons has also been reported for other genetic models of PD. These observations support the concept that axons are involved early in the course of the disease. We suggest that effective neuroprotective approaches will be aimed at preventing axonal degeneration.
28582878	Lysosomal dysfunction plays a central role in the pathogenesis of several neurodegenerative disorders, including Parkinson's disease (PD). Several genes linked to genetic forms of PD, including leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2), functionally converge on the lysosomal system. While mutations in LRRK2 are commonly associated with autosomal-dominant PD, the physiological and pathological functions of this kinase remain poorly understood. Here, we demonstrate that LRRK2 regulates lysosome size, number and function in astrocytes, which endogenously express high levels of LRRK2. Expression of LRRK2 G2019S, the most common pathological mutation, produces enlarged lysosomes and diminishes the lysosomal capacity of these cells. Enlarged lysosomes appears to be a common phenotype associated with pathogenic LRRK2 mutations, as we also observed this effect in cells expressing other LRRK2 mutations; R1441C or Y1699C.  The lysosomal defects associated with these mutations are dependent on both the catalytic activity of the kinase and autophosphorylation of LRRK2 at serine 1292.  Further, we demonstrate that blocking LRRK2's kinase activity, with the potent and selective inhibitor PF-06447475, rescues the observed defects in lysosomal morphology and function. The present study also establishes that G2019S mutation leads to a reduction in lysosomal pH and increased expression of the lysosomal ATPase ATP13A2, a gene linked to a parkinsonian syndrome (Kufor-Rakeb syndrome), in brain samples from mouse and human LRRK2 G2019S carriers. Together, these results demonstrate that PD-associated LRRK2 mutations perturb lysosome function in a kinase-dependent manner, highlighting the therapeutic promise of LRRK2 kinase inhibitors in the treatment of PD.
28582879	The leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) mutation G2019S is one of the most common genetic causes in Parkinson's disease (PD). The penetrance of G2019S LRRK2 is incomplete and is age-dependent, therefore, it has been speculated that environmental toxins and aging could contribute to G2019S LRRK2-related PD pathogenesis. To prove this speculation, we performed a longitudinal investigation in mice bearing G2019S LRRK2 mutation. BAC G2019S LRRK2 transgenic (Tg) mice and their wildtype (Wt) littermates were treated with lactacystin, a specific proteasome inhibitor. The susceptibilities of mice to lactacystin-induced nigrostriatal dopaminergic (DAergic) degeneration were evaluated, at 5 and 12 months of age. We found that lactacystin treatment caused a greater decline of striatal DA content in the Tg mice at either 5 or 12 months of age than their age-matched Wt littermates. Moreover, the lactacystin-treated Tg or Wt mice at 12 months of age lose much more nigral tyrosine hydroxylase (TH)-positive neurons than the mice at 5 months of age, indicating an age-associated DAergic neurotoxicity. Additionally, stereotactic injection of lactacystin induced a dramatic increase of activated microglia in substantia nigra of mice at 12 months of age, compared with mice at 5 months of age. In summary, our study suggests that expression of the G2019S mutation in the mouse LRRK2 gene confers an age-associated high susceptibility to proteasome inhibition-induced nigrostriatal DAergic degeneration.
28582880	Leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) and tau have been identified as risk factors of Parkinson's disease (PD). As LRRK2 is a kinase and tau is hyperphosphorylated in some LRRK2 mutation carriers of PD patients, the obvious hypothesis is that tau could be a substrate of LRRK2. Previous reports that LRRK2 phosphorylates free tau or tubulin-associated tau provide direct support for this proposition.  By comparing LRRK2 with cdk5, we show that wild-type LRRK2 and the G2019S mutant phosphorylate free recombinant full-length tau protein with specific activity 480- and 250-fold lower than cdk5, respectively. More strikingly tau binds to wt LRRK2 or the G2019S mutant 140- or 200-fold more strongly than cdk5. The extremely low activity of LRRK2 but strong binding affinity with tau suggests that LRRK2 may facilitate tau phosphorylation as a scaffold protein rather than as a major tau kinase. This hypothesis is further supported by the observation that (i) cdk5 or tau coimmunoprecipitates with endogenous LRRK2 in SH-SY5Y cells, in mouse brain tissue, and in human PBMCs; (ii) knocking down endogenous LRRK2 by its siRNA in SH-SY5Y cells reduces tau phosphorylation at Ser396 and Ser404; (iii) inhibiting LRRK2 kinase activity by its inhibitors has no effect on tau phosphorylation at these two sites; and (iv) overexpressing wt LRRK2, the G2019S mutant, or the D1994A kinase-dead mutant in SH-SY5Y cells has no effect on tau phosphorylation. Our results suggest that LRRK2 facilitates tau phosphorylation indirectly by recruiting tau or cdk5 rather than by directly phosphorylating tau.
28582881	Parkinson's disease (PD) is a major movement disorder characterized by the loss of dopamine neurons and formation of Lewy bodies. Clinical and pathological evidence indicates that multiple brain regions are affected in PD in a spatiotemporal manner and are associated with a variety of motor and nonmotor symptoms, including disturbances in mood, executive function, and memory. The common PD-associated gene for leucine-rich repeat kinase, leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2), is highly expressed in brain regions that are involved with nonmotor functions, including the neocortex and hippocampus, but whether mutant LRRK2 contributes to neuronal dysfunction in these regions is unknown. Here, we use bacterial artificial chromosome transgenic mouse models of LRRK2 to explore potential nonmotor mechanisms of PD. Through electrophysiological analysis of the Schaffer collateral-CA1 synapse in dorsal hippocampus, we find that overexpression of LRRK2-G2019S increases basal synaptic efficiency through a postsynaptic mechanism, and disrupts long-term depression. Furthermore, these effects of the G2019S mutation are age dependent and can be normalized by acute inhibition of LRRK2 kinase activity. In contrast, overexpression of wild-type LRRK2 has no effect under the same conditions, suggesting a specific phenotype for the G2019S mutation. These results identify a pathogenic function of LRRK2 in the hippocampus that may contribute to nonmotor symptoms of PD.SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT: Parkinson's disease (PD) is among the most common neurological diseases and is best known for its adverse effects on brain regions that control motor function, resulting in tremor, rigidity, and gait abnormalities. Less well appreciated are the psychiatric symptoms experienced by many PD patients, including depression and memory loss, which do not respond well to currently available treatments for PD. Here, we describe functional effects of a common PD-linked mutation of leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 in the mouse hippocampus, an area of the brain that is responsible for encoding and retaining memories. By providing a potential mechanism for some of the cognitive symptoms produced by this mutation, our findings may lead to novel approaches for the treatment of nonmotor symptoms of PD.
28582882	INTRODUCTION: Germline silencing of the PD-related protein LRRK2 does not alter glutamate or dopamine release in adult mice, but some exploratory abnormalities have been reported with ageing. Contrastingly, high levels of human LRRK2 cause locomotor alterations and cognitive deficits accompanied by reduced striatal dopamine levels, with the latter also observed in G2019S mutant mice. Comparative cognitive and motor behavioral testing of LRRK2 KO, overexpressor and mutant overexpressor mice has not previously been reported.  METHODS: Parallel, comparative behavioral characterization was performed assessing motor and cognitive abilities. Striatal antisense oligonucleotide injections were conducted to investigate the effects of acute LRRK2 silencing on behavior and dopamine fiber density. Striatal synaptosomes prepared from hG2019S mice assessed vesicular release of dopamine and its sensitivity to D2 autoreceptor stimulation.  RESULTS: Genetic ablation of LRRK2 has no long-term consequences on motor or cognitive function. Consistently, no effects on behavior or dopaminergic fiber density were observed following acute striatal silencing. Conversely, 12-month OE mice show persistent locomotor deficits and worsening of cognitive abilities; whereas, hG2019S mice display early hyperactivity and effective learning and memory that progress to decreased motor and cognitive deficits at older ages. The G2019S mutation does not affect vesicular dopamine release, but decreases its sensitivity to D2-mediated inhibition.  CONCLUSION: LRRK2 silencing is well tolerated in mouse, arguing PD does not result from LRRK2 loss of function. High levels of WT and G2019S LRRK2 produce similar but temporally distinct phenotypes, potentially modeling different stages of disease progression. The data implicate gain of LRRK2 function in the pathogenesis of PD.
28582883	Mutation of leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) is the most common genetic cause of both familial and sporadic Parkinson's disease (PD) cases. Several mutations in LRRK2 gene were reported in PD patients. R1441 is the second most frequent site of LRRK2 mutation. We generated (R1441C) LRRK2 transgenic mice that displayed motor deficits at the age of 16 months. Compared with wild-type mice, 16-month-old (R1441C) LRRK2 mice exhibited a significant reduction in the number of substantia nigra (SN) dopaminergic neurons. To elucidate molecular pathogenic pathways involved in (R1441C) LRRK2-induced death of SN dopaminergic neurons, we performed microarray analysis to visualize altered mRNA expressions in the SN of (R1441C) LRRK2 mouse. In the SN of (R1441C) LRRK2 transgenic mouse, the mRNA expression of three genes that promote cell death was upregulated, while the mRNA expression of seven genes that contribute to neurogenesis/neuroprotection was significantly downregulated. Our results suggest that altered expression of these genes involved in regulating neuronal survival may contribute to the pathogenesis of (R1441C) LRRK2-induced PD.
28582884	Leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) is a causative gene for Parkinson's disease, but the physiological function and the mechanism(s) by which the cellular activity of LRRK2 is regulated are poorly understood. Here, we identified p21-activated kinase 6 (PAK6) as a novel interactor of the GTPase/ROC domain of LRRK2. p21-activated kinases are serine-threonine kinases that serve as targets for the small GTP binding proteins Cdc42 and Rac1 and have been implicated in different morphogenetic processes through remodeling of the actin cytoskeleton such as synapse formation and neuritogenesis. Using an in vivo neuromorphology assay, we show that PAK6 is a positive regulator of neurite outgrowth and that LRRK2 is required for this function. Analyses of post-mortem brain tissue from idiopathic and LRRK2 G2019S carriers reveal an increase in PAK6 activation state, whereas knock-out LRRK2 mice display reduced PAK6 activation and phosphorylation of PAK6 substrates. Taken together, these results support a critical role of LRRK2 GTPase domain in cytoskeletal dynamics in vivo through the novel interactor PAK6, and provide a valuable platform to unravel the mechanism underlying LRRK2-mediated pathophysiology. We propose p21-activated kinase 6 (PAK6) as a novel interactor of leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2), a kinase involved in Parkinson's disease (PD). In health, PAK6 regulates neurite complexity in the brain and LRRK2 is required for its function, (a) whereas PAK6 is aberrantly activated in LRRK2-linked PD brain (b) suggesting that LRRK2 toxicity is mediated by PAK6.
28582885	BACKGROUND: Leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) is a gene in which a mutation causes Parkinson's disease (PD), and p53 is a prototype tumor suppressor. In addition, activation of p53 in patient with PD has been reported by several studies. Because phosphorylation of p53 is critical for regulating its activity and LRRK2 is a kinase, we tested whether p53 is phosphorylated by LRRK2.  RESULTS: LRRK2 phosphorylates threonine (Thr) at TXR sites in an in vitro kinase assay, and the T304 and T377 were identified as putative phosphorylated residues.  An increase of phospho-Thr in the p53 TXR motif was confirmed in the cells overexpressing G2019S, and human induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells of a G2019S carrier. Interactions between LRRK2 and p53 were confirmed by co-immunoprecipitation of lysates of differentiated SH-SY5Y cells. LRRK2 mediated p53 phosphorylation translocalizes p53 predominantly to nucleus and increases p21(WAF1/CIP1) expression in SH-SY5Y cells based on reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction and Western blot assay results. The luciferase assay using the p21(WAF1/CIP1) promoter-reporter also confirmed that LRRK2 kinase activity increases p21 expression. Exogenous expression of G2019S and the phosphomimetic p53 T304/377D mutants increased expression of p21(WAF1/CIP1) and cleaved PARP, and cytotoxicity in the same cells. We also observed increase of p21 expression in rat primary neuron cells after transient expression of p53 T304/377D mutants and the mid-brain lysates of the G2019S transgenic mice.  CONCLUSION: p53 is a LRRK2 kinase substrate. Phosphorylation of p53 by LRRK2 induces p21(WAF1/CIP1) expression and apoptosis in differentiated SH-SY5Y cells and rat primary neurons.
28582886	Mutations in leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) are the most common known cause of inherited Parkinson's disease (PD), and LRRK2 is a risk factor for idiopathic PD. How LRRK2 function is regulated is not well understood. Recently, the highly conserved 14-3-3 proteins, which play a key role in many cellular functions including cell death, have been shown to interact with LRRK2. In this study, we investigated whether 14-3-3s can regulate mutant LRRK2-induced neurite shortening and kinase activity. In the presence of 14-3-3θ overexpression, neurite length of primary neurons from BAC transgenic G2019S-LRRK2 mice returned back to wild-type levels. Similarly, 14-3-3θ overexpression reversed neurite shortening in neuronal cultures from BAC transgenic R1441G-LRRK2 mice. Conversely, inhibition of 14-3-3s by the pan-14-3-3 inhibitor difopein or dominant-negative 14-3-3θ further reduced neurite length in G2019S-LRRK2 cultures. Since G2019S-LRRK2 toxicity is likely mediated through increased kinase activity, we examined 14-3-3θ's effects on LRRK2 kinase activity. 14-3-3θ overexpression reduced the kinase activity of G2019S-LRRK2, while difopein promoted the kinase activity of G2019S-LRRK2. The ability of 14-3-3θ to reduce LRRK2 kinase activity required direct binding of 14-3-3θ with LRRK2. The potentiation of neurite shortening by difopein in G2019S-LRRK2 neurons was reversed by LRRK2 kinase inhibitors. Taken together, we conclude that 14-3-3θ can regulate LRRK2 and reduce the toxicity of mutant LRRK2 through a reduction of kinase activity.
28582887	Mutations in leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) are the most common causes of late onset autosomal dominant form of Parkinson disease (PD). Gain of kinase activity due to the substitution of Gly 2019 to Ser (G2019S) is the most common mutation in the kinase domain of LRRK2. Genetic predisposition and environmental toxins contribute to the susceptibility of neurodegeneration in PD. To identify whether the genetic mutations in LRRK2 increase the susceptibility to environmental toxins in PD models, we exposed transgenic mice expressing human G2019S mutant or wild type (WT) LRRK2 to the environmental toxin 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP). MPTP treatment resulted in a greater loss of tyrosine hydroxylase-positive neurons in the substantia nigra pars compacta (SNpc) in LRRK2 G2019S transgenic mice compared to the LRRK2 WT overexpressing mice. Similarly loss of dopamine levels were greater in the striatum of LRRK2 G2019S mice when compared to the LRRK2 WT mice when both were treated with MPTP. This study suggests a likely interaction between genetic and environmental risk factors in the PD pathogenesis and that the G2019S mutation in LRRK2 increases the susceptibility of dopamine neurons to PD-causing toxins.
28582888	Mutations in Park8, encoding for the multidomain Leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) protein, comprise the predominant genetic cause of Parkinson's disease (PD). G2019S, the most common amino acid substitution activates the kinase two- to threefold. This has motivated the development of LRRK2 kinase inhibitors; however, poor consensus on physiological LRRK2 substrates has hampered clinical development of such therapeutics. We employ a combination of phosphoproteomics, genetics, and pharmacology to unambiguously identify a subset of Rab GTPases as key LRRK2 substrates. LRRK2 directly phosphorylates these both in vivo and in vitro on an evolutionary conserved residue in the switch II domain. Pathogenic LRRK2 variants mapping to different functional domains increase phosphorylation of Rabs and this strongly decreases their affinity to regulatory proteins including Rab GDP dissociation inhibitors (GDIs). Our findings uncover a key class of bona-fide LRRK2 substrates and a novel regulatory mechanism of Rabs that connects them to PD.
28582889	Parkinson's disease (PD) is a progressive neurodegenerative disorder that lacks a disease-modifying therapy. Leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) was implicated as the most common genetic cause of PD. We previously established a LRRK2-G2019S Drosophila model that displayed the crucial phenotypes of LRRK2 parkinsonism.  Here, we used a two-step approach to identify compounds from the FDA-approved licensed drug library that could suppress neurite degeneration in LRRK2-G2019S parkinsonism. Of 640 compounds, 29 rescued neurite degeneration phenotypes and 3 restored motor disability and dopaminergic neuron loss in aged LRRK2-G2019S flies. Of these three drugs, lovastatin had the highest lipophilicity, which facilitated crossing the blood-brain barrier. In LRRK2-G2019S knock-in mice and stably transfected human dopaminergic cells, lovastatin significantly rescued neurite degeneration in a dose-dependent manner, within a range of 0.05-0.1 μm The beneficial effect of lovastatin was exerted by activating anti-apoptotic Akt/Nrf signaling and decreasing caspase 3 levels. We also observed that lovastatin inhibited GSK3β activity, a kinase downstream of Akt, by up-regulating GSK3β (Ser9) phosphorylation. This inhibition subsequently decreased tau phosphorylation, which was linked to neuronal cytoskeleton instability.  Conversely, pre-treatment with the Akt inhibitor, A6730, blocked the lovastatin-induced neuroprotective effect. The rescuing effects of lovastatin in dendritic arborization of LRRK2-G2019S neurons were abolished by co-expressing either a mutant allele of Akt (Akt1(04226)) or a constitutively active form of GSK3β (sgg(S9A)). Our findings demonstrated that lovastatin restored LRRK2-G2019S neurite degeneration by augmenting Akt/NRF2 pathway and inhibiting downstream GSK3β activity, which decreased phospho-tau levels. We suggested that lovastatin is a potential disease-modifying agent for LRRK2-G2019S parkinsonism.
28582890	Most of cases of Parkinson's disease (PD) have a sporadic origin, with their causes mostly unknown, although overexposure to some environmental factors has been found to occur in some cases. Other forms of parkinsonism are the consequence of dominant or recessive mutations in specific genes, e.g.  α-synuclein, parkin and, more recently, leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2), whose G2019S mutation represents the most prevalent form of late-onset, autosomal dominant familial PD. A transgenic mouse model expressing the G2019S mutation of LRRK2 is already available and apparently may represent a valuable experimental model for investigating PD pathogenesis and novel treatments. We designed a long-term study with these animals aimed at: (i) elucidating the changes experienced by the endocannabinoid signaling system in the basal ganglia during the progression of the disease in these mice, paying emphasis in the CB2 receptor, which has emerged as a promising target in PD, and (ii) evaluating the potential of compounds selectively activating this CB2 receptor, as disease-modifying agents in these mice. Our results unequivocally demonstrate that LRRK2 transgenic mice develop motor impairment consisting of small anomalies in rotarod performance (presumably reflecting a deficit in motor coordination and dystonia) and a strong deficiency in the hanging-wire test (reflecting muscle weakness), rather than hypokinesia which was difficult to be demonstrated in the actimeter. These behavioral responses occurred in absence of any evidence of reactive gliosis and neuronal losses, as well as synaptic deterioration in the basal ganglia, except an apparent impairment in autophagy reflected by elevated LAMP-1 immunolabelling in the striatum and substantia nigra. Furthermore, there were no changes in the status of the CB2 receptor, as well as in other elements of the endocannabinoid signaling, in the basal ganglia, but, paradoxically, the selective activation of this receptor partially reversed the deficits in the hanging-wire test of LRRK2 transgenic mice. This was accompanied by normalization in LAMP-1 immunolabelling in the basal ganglia, although it is possible that other CNS structures, remaining to be identified, are involved in the behavioral improvement. In summary, our data support the interest of the CB2 receptor as a potential pharmacological target in LRRK2 transgenic mice, although the neuronal substrates underlying these benefits might be not completely related to the basal ganglia and to the presumed parkinsonian features of these mice.
28582891	Autosomal-dominant mutations in the gene encoding leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) account for the most common monogenic form of Parkinson's disease (PD). A link between autophagy dysregulation and LRRK2 has consistently been reported, but it remains poorly defined which step is targeted by LRRK2. Here, we sought to examine the effect of LRRK2 on the sequestration and degradation of aggregated protein complexes for autophagic clearance. Because two major intracellular protein degradation systems, the ubiquitin proteasome system and the autophagy, are functionally coupled, proteasome inhibition is suggested to activate autophagy. So, we induced protein quality control-associated autophagy using the proteasome inhibitor MG132 in differentiated SH-SY5Y cells and mice expressing G2019S mutant LRRK2 to uncover how the autophagy pathway is affected by LRRK2. We found that LRRK2 disrupted aggresome formation for autophagic clearance of accumulated protein aggregates. Specifically, we observed the following in differentiated SH-SY5Y cells with overexpressed wild-type and G2019S LRRK2: 1) large, clear, perinuclear aggresomes were not detected under MG132, instead, much smaller aggregates were broadly distributed in the cytosol; 2) enhanced accumulation of LC3-II and p62/ubiquitin-positive protein inclusions were noted; and 3) protein aggregates were not cleared even after a recovery period, which exacerbated the MG132-induced cytotoxicity. Notably, higher protein accumulation was detected in the brains of G2019S transgenic mice than in the brains of littermate control mice under proteasome inhibition. Our present findings provide insight into the precise mechanisms that underlie autophagy dysregulation in the brains of patients with PD with LRRK2 mutations."
28582892	Mutations in the gene encoding leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) can cause Parkinson's disease (PD), and the most common disease-associated mutation, G2019S, increases kinase activity. Because LRRK2 expression levels rise during synaptogenesis and are highest in dorsal striatal spiny projection neurons (SPNs), we tested the hypothesis that the LRRK2-G2019S mutation would alter development of excitatory synaptic networks in dorsal striatum. To circumvent experimental confounds associated with LRRK2 overexpression, we used mice expressing LRRK2-G2019S or D2017A (kinase-dead) knockin mutations. In whole-cell recordings, G2019S SPNs exhibited a fourfold increase in sEPSC frequency compared with wild-type SPNs in postnatal day 21 mice. Such heightened neural activity was increased similarly in direct- and indirect-pathway SPNs, and action potential-dependent activity was particularly elevated. Excitatory synaptic activity in D2017A SPNs was similar to wild type, indicating a selective effect of G2019S. Acute exposure to LRRK2 kinase inhibitors normalized activity, supporting that excessive neural activity in G2019S SPNs is mediated directly and is kinase dependent. Although dendritic arborization and densities of excitatory presynaptic terminals and postsynaptic dendritic spines in G2019S SPNs were similar to wild type, G2019S SPNs displayed larger spines that were matched functionally by a shift toward larger postsynaptic response amplitudes. Acutely isolating striatum from overlying neocortex normalized sEPSC frequency in G2019S mutants, supporting that abnormal corticostriatal activity is involved. These findings indicate that the G2019S mutation imparts a gain-of-abnormal function to SPN activity and morphology during a stage of development when activity can permanently modify circuit structure and function.SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT: Mutations in the kinase domain of leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) follow Parkinson's disease (PD) heritability. How such mutations affect brain function is poorly understood. LRRK2 expression levels rise after birth at a time when synapses are forming and are highest in dorsal striatum, suggesting that LRRK2 regulates development of striatal circuits. During a period of postnatal development when activity plays a large role in permanently shaping neural circuits, our data show how the most common PD-causing LRRK2 mutation dramatically alters excitatory synaptic activity and the shape of postsynaptic structures in striatum. These findings provide new insight into early functional and structural aberrations in striatal connectivity that may predispose striatal circuitry to both motor and nonmotor dysfunction later in life.
28582893	Pathologic inclusions define α-synucleinopathies that include Parkinson's disease (PD). The most common genetic cause of PD is the G2019S LRRK2 mutation that upregulates LRRK2 kinase activity. However, the interaction between α-synuclein, LRRK2, and the formation of α-synuclein inclusions remains unclear. Here, we show that G2019S-LRRK2 expression, in both cultured neurons and dopaminergic neurons in the rat substantia nigra pars compact, increases the recruitment of endogenous α-synuclein into inclusions in response to α-synuclein fibril exposure. This results from the expression of mutant G2019S-LRRK2, as overexpression of WT-LRRK2 not only does not increase formation of inclusions but reduces their abundance.  In addition, treatment of primary mouse neurons with LRRK2 kinase inhibitors, PF-06447475 and MLi-2, blocks G2019S-LRRK2 effects, suggesting that the G2019S-LRRK2 potentiation of inclusion formation depends on its kinase activity.  Overexpression of G2019S-LRRK2 slightly increases, whereas WT-LRRK2 decreases, total levels of α-synuclein. Knockdown of total α-synuclein with potent antisense oligonucleotides substantially reduces inclusion formation in G2019S-LRRK2-expressing neurons, suggesting that LRRK2 influences α-synuclein inclusion formation by altering α-synuclein levels. These findings support the hypothesis that G2019S-LRRK2 may increase the progression of pathological α-synuclein inclusions after the initial formation of α-synuclein pathology by increasing a pool of α-synuclein that is more susceptible to forming inclusions.SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT: α-Synuclein inclusions are found in the brains of patients with many different neurodegenerative diseases. Point mutation, duplication, or triplication of the α-synuclein gene can all cause Parkinson's disease (PD). The G2019S mutation in LRRK2 is the most common known genetic cause of PD. The interaction between G2019S-LRRK2 and α-synuclein may uncover new mechanisms and targets for neuroprotection. Here, we show that expression of G2019S-LRRK2 increases α-synuclein mobility and enhances aggregation of α-synuclein in primary cultured neurons and in dopaminergic neurons of the substantia nigra pars compacta, a susceptible brain region in PD. Potent LRRK2 kinase inhibitors, which are being developed for clinical use, block the increased α-synuclein aggregation in G2019S-LRRK2-expressing neurons. These results demonstrate that α-synuclein inclusion formation in neurons can be blocked and that novel therapeutic compounds targeting this process by inhibiting LRRK2 kinase activity may slow progression of PD-associated pathology.
28582894	Autosomal dominant mutations that activate the leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) cause inherited Parkinson's disease. Recent work has revealed that LRRK2 directly phosphorylates a conserved threonine/serine residue in the effector-binding switch-II motif of a number of Rab GTPase proteins, including Rab10. Here we describe a facile and robust method to assess phosphorylation of endogenous Rab10 in mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs), lung and spleen-derived B-cells, based on the ability of the Phos-tag reagent to retard the electrophoretic mobility of LRRK2-phosphorylated Rab10. We exploit this assay to show that phosphorylation of Rab10 is ablated in kinase-inactive LRRK2[D2017A] knockin MEFs and mouse lung, demonstrating that LRRK2 is the major Rab10 kinase in these cells/tissue. We also establish that the Phos-tag assay can be deployed to monitor the impact that activating LRRK2 pathogenic (G2019S and R1441G) knockin mutations have on stimulating Rab10 phosphorylation. We show that upon addition of LRRK2 inhibitors, Rab10 is dephosphorylated within 1-2 min, markedly more rapidly than the Ser(935) and Ser(1292) biomarker sites that require 40-80 min. Furthermore, we find that phosphorylation of Rab10 is suppressed in LRRK2[S910A+S935A] knockin MEFs indicating that phosphorylation of Ser(910) and Ser(935) and potentially 14-3-3 binding play a role in facilitating the phosphorylation of Rab10 by LRRK2 in vivo The Rab Phos-tag assay has the potential to significantly aid with evaluating the effect that inhibitors, mutations and other factors have on the LRRK2 signalling pathway.
28582895	Parkinson's disease (PD) is the second common neurodegenerative disease.  Identification of biomarkers for early diagnosis and prediction of disease progression is important. The present comparative proteomic study of serum samples using two-dimensional fluorescence differential gel electrophoresis followed by ELISA confirmation demonstrated that protein expression of Rab35 was increased in PD patients compared with matched control subjects and other parkinsonian disorders, progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP) and multiple system atrophy (MSA). The serum level of Rab35 was significantly correlated with the age at onset of PD. The median age of onset in patients with higher Rab35 serum level was 5 years younger than those with lower Rab35 serum level. There was a positive correlation between the Rab35 level and disease duration of PD. Moreover, the protein expression of Rab35 was increased in the substantia nigra but not in the striatum of mouse models of PD, including MPTP-treated mice, rotenone-treated mice, (R1441C) LRRK2 or (G2019S) LRRK2 transgenic mice. Furthermore, overexpression of Rab35 increased the aggregation and secretion of mutant A53T α-synuclein in dopaminergic SH-SY5Y cells. Co-expression of Rab35 with wild-type or A53T α-synuclein in SH-SY5Y cells deteriorated cell death. Our results suggest that Rab35 is potentially useful in the differential diagnosis of parkinsonian disorders and is implicated in the pathogenesis of PD.
28582896	Mutations in LRRK2 gene cause inherited Parkinson's disease (PD) and variations around LRRK2 act as risk factor for disease. Similar to sporadic disease, LRRK2-linked cases show late onset and, typically, the presence of proteinaceous inclusions named Lewy bodies (LBs) in neurons. Recently, defects on ceramide (Cer) metabolism have been recognized in PD. In particular, heterozygous mutations in the gene encoding for glucocerebrosidase (GBA1), a lysosomal enzyme converting glucosyl-ceramides (Glc-Cer) into Cer, increase the risk of developing PD. Although several studies have linked LRRK2 with membrane-related processes and autophagic-lysosomal pathway regulation, whether this protein impinges on the Cer pathway has not been addressed. Here, using a targeted lipidomics approach, we report an altered sphingolipid composition in Lrrk2(-/-) mouse brains. In particular, we observe a significant increase of Cer levels in Lrrk2(-/-) mice and direct effects on GBA1. Collectively, our results suggest a link between LRRK2 and Cer metabolism, providing new insights into the possible role of this protein in sphingolipids metabolism, with implications for PD therapeutics.
28582897	Leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) kinase activity is increased in several pathogenic mutations, including the most common mutation, G2019S, and is known to play a role in Parkinson's disease (PD) pathobiology. This has stimulated the development of potent, selective LRRK2 kinase inhibitors as one of the most prevailing disease-modifying therapeutic PD strategies. Although several lines of evidence support beneficial effects of LRRK2 kinase inhibitors, many questions need to be answered before clinical applications can be envisaged. Using six different LRRK2 kinase inhibitors, we show that LRRK2 kinase inhibition induces LRRK2 dephosphorylation and can reduce LRRK2 protein levels of overexpressed wild type and G2019S, but not A2016T or K1906M, LRRK2 as well as endogenous LRRK2 in mouse brain, lung and kidney. The inhibitor-induced reduction in LRRK2 levels could be reversed by proteasomal inhibition, but not by lysosomal inhibition, while mRNA levels remained unaffected. In addition, using LRRK2 S910A and S935A phosphorylation mutants, we show that dephosphorylation of these sites is not required for LRRK2 degradation. Increasing our insight in the molecular and cellular consequences of LRRK2 kinase inhibition will be crucial in the further development of LRRK2-based PD therapies.
28582898	Parkinson's disease (PD) is a severe neurodegenerative disorder caused by progressive loss of dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra pars compacta of the midbrain. The molecular mechanism of PD pathogenesis is unclear. Mutations in the leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) gene are a common genetic cause of familial and sporadic PD. However, studies on LRRK2 mutant mice revealed no visible dopaminergic neuronal loss in the midbrain. While surveying a LRRK2 knockout mouse strain, we found that old animals developed age-dependent hepatic vascular growths similar to cavernous hemangiomas. In livers of these hemangioma-positive LRRK2 knockout mice, we detected an increased expression of the HIF-2α protein and significant reactivation of the expression of the HIF-2α target gene erythropoietin (EPO), a finding consistent with a role of the HIF-2α pathway in blood vessel vascularization. We also found that the kidney EPO expression was reduced to 20% of the wild-type level in 18-month-old LRRK2 knockout mice. Unexpectedly, this reduction was restored to wild-type levels when the knockout mice were 22 months to 23 months old, implying a feedback mechanism regulating kidney EPO expression. Our findings reveal a novel function of LRRK2 in regulating EPO expression and imply a potentially novel relationship between PD genes and hematopoiesis.
28582899	BACKGROUND: α-Synuclein (αSYN) has been genetically implicated in familial and sporadic Parkinson's disease (PD), and is associated with disease susceptibility, progression and pathology. Excess amounts of αSYN are toxic to neurons. In the brain, microglial αSYN clearance is closely related to neuronal survival.  Leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) is the one of the other genes implicated in familial and sporadic PD. While LRRK2 is known to be expressed in microglia, its true function remains to be elucidated. In this study, we investigated αSYN clearance by microglia isolated from LRRK2-knockout (KO) mice.  RESULTS: In LRRK2-KO microglia, αSYN was taken up in larger amounts and cleared from the supernatant more effectively than for microglia isolated from wild-type (WT) mice. This higher clearance ability of LRRK2-KO microglia was thought to be due to an increase of Rab5-positive endosomes, but not Rab7- or Rab11-positive endosomes. Increased engagement between Rab5 and dynamin 1 was also observed in LRRK2-KO microglia.  CONCLUSION: LRRK2 negatively regulates the clearance of αSYN accompanied by down-regulation of the endocytosis pathway. Our findings reveal a new functional role of LRRK2 in microglia and offer a new insight into the mechanism of PD pathogenesis.
28582900	Leucine-rich repeat kinase (LRRK2), a major causal gene of Parkinson's disease (PD), functions as a kinase. The most prevalent mutation of LRRK2 is G2019S. It exhibits increased kinase activity compared to the wildtype LRRK2. Previous studies have shown that LRRK2 can phosphorylate p53 at T304 and T377 of threonine-X-arginine (TXR) motif in neurons. Reduction of LRRK2 expression or inhibition of LRRK2 kinase activity has been shown to be able to alleviate LPS-induced neuroinflammation in microglia cells. In this study, we found that LRRK2 could also phosphorylate p53 in microglia model BV2 cells. Transfection of BV2 with phosphomimetic p53 T304/377D significantly increased the secretion of pro-inflammatory cytokine TNFα compared to BV2 transfected with p53 wild type after LPS treatment. In addition, conditioned media from these transfected cells increased the death of dopaminergic neuronal SN4741 cells. Moreover, such neurotoxic effect was rescued by co-treatment with the conditioned media and etanercept, a TNFα blocking antibody. Furthermore, TNFα secretion was significantly increased in primary microglia derived from G2019S transgenic mice treated with LPS compared to that in cells derived from their littermates. These results suggest that LRRK2 kinase activity in microglia can contribute to neuroinflammation in PD via phosphorylating p53 at T304 and T377 site.
28582901	INTRODUCTION: Mutations in leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) are the most prevalent cause of familial and sporadic Parkinson's disease (PD). Because most pathogenic LRRK2 mutations result in enhanced kinase activity, it suggests that LRRK2 inhibitors may serve as a potential treatment for PD. To evaluate whether LRRK2 inhibitors are effective therapies for PD, it is crucial to know whether LRRK2 inhibitors will affect dopaminergic (DAergic) neurotransmission. However, to date, there is no study to investigate the impact of LRRK2 inhibitors on DAergic neurotransmission.  AIMS: To address this gap in knowledge, we examined the effects of three types of LRRK2 inhibitors (LRRK2-IN-1, GSK2578215A, and GNE-7915) on dopamine (DA) release in the dorsal striatum using fast-scan cyclic voltammetry and DA neuron firing in the substantia nigra pars compacta (SNpc) using patch clamp in mouse brain slices.  RESULTS: We found that LRRK2-IN-1 at a concentration higher than 1 μM causes off-target effects and decreases DA release, whereas GSK2578215A and GNE-7915 do not. All three inhibitors at 1 μM have no effect on DA release and DA neuron firing rate. We have further assessed the effects of the inhibitors in two preclinical LRRK2 mouse models (i.e., BAC transgenic hG2019S and hR1441G) and demonstrated that GNE-7915 enhances DA release and synaptic vesicle mobilization/recycling.  CONCLUSION: GNE-7915 can be validated for further therapeutic development for PD.
28582902	BACKGROUND: LRRK2 mutations and risk variants increase susceptibility to inherited and idiopathic Parkinson's disease, while recent studies have identified potential protective variants. This, and the fact that LRRK2 mutation carriers develop symptoms and brain pathology almost indistinguishable from idiopathic Parkinson's disease, has led to enormous interest in this protein. LRRK2 has been implicated in a range of cellular events, but key among them is canonical Wnt signalling, which results in increased levels of transcriptionally active β-catenin. This pathway is critical for the development and survival of the midbrain dopaminergic neurones typically lost in Parkinson's disease. METHODS: Here we use Lrrk2 knockout mice and fibroblasts to investigate the effect of loss of Lrrk2 on canonical Wnt signalling in vitro and in vivo. Micro-computed tomography was used to study predicted tibial strength, while pulldown assays were employed to measure brain β-catenin levels. A combination of luciferase assays, immunofluorescence and co-immunoprecipitation were performed to measure canonical Wnt activity and investigate the relationship between LRRK2 and β-catenin. TOPflash assays are also used to study the effects of LRRK2 kinase inhibition and pathogenic and protective LRRK2 mutations on Wnt signalling. Data were tested by Analysis of Variance. RESULTS: Loss of Lrrk2 causes a dose-dependent increase in the levels of transcriptionally active β-catenin in the brain, and alters tibial bone architecture, decreasing the predicted risk of fracture. Lrrk2 knockout cells display increased TOPflash and Axin2 promoter activities, both basally and following Wnt activation. Consistently, over-expressed LRRK2 was found to bind β-catenin and repress TOPflash activation. Some pathogenic LRRK2 mutations and risk variants further suppressed TOPflash, whereas the protective R1398H variant increased Wnt signalling activity. LRRK2 kinase inhibitors affected canonical Wnt signalling differently due to off-targeting; however, specific LRRK2 inhibition reduced canonical Wnt signalling similarly to pathogenic mutations. CONCLUSIONS: Loss of LRRK2 causes increased canonical Wnt activity in vitro and in vivo. In agreement, over-expressed LRRK2 binds and represses β-catenin, suggesting LRRK2 may act as part of the β-catenin destruction complex. Since some pathogenic LRRK2 mutations enhance this effect while the protective R1398H variant relieves it, our data strengthen the notion that decreased canonical Wnt activity is central to Parkinson's disease pathogenesis."
28582903	Leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (Lrrk2) has been implicated in the pathophysiology of Parkinson's disease. Lrrk2 is expressed in diverse cells including neurons and dendritic cells (DCs). In DCs Lrrk2 was shown to up-regulate Na(+)/Ca(2+)-exchanger activity. The elimination of Ca(2+) by Na(+)/Ca(2+) -exchangers requires maintenance of the Na(+) gradient by the Na(+)/K(+) -ATPase.  The present study thus explored whether Lrrk2 impacts on Na(+)/K(+) -ATPase expression and function. To this end DCs were isolated from gene-targeted mice lacking Lrrk2 (Lrrk2(-/-)) and their wild-type littermates (Lrrk2(+/+)).  Na(+)/K(+) -ATPase activity was estimated from K(+) induced, ouabain sensitive, current determined by whole cell patch clamp. Na(+)/K(+) -ATPase α1 subunit transcript and protein levels were determined by RT-qPCR and flow cytometry. As a result, the K(+) induced current was significantly smaller in Lrrk2(-/-) than in Lrrk2(+/+) DCs and was completely abolished by ouabain (100 μM) in both genotypes. The K(+) induced, ouabain sensitive, current in Lrrk2(+/+) DCs was significantly blunted by Lrrk2 inhibitor GSK2578215A (1 μM, 24 hours). The Na(+)/K(+) -ATPase α1 subunit transcript and protein levels were significantly lower in Lrrk2(-/-) than in Lrrk2(+/+) DCs and significantly decreased by Lrrk2 inhibitor GSK2578215A (1 μM, 24 hours). In conclusion, Lrrk2 is a powerful regulator of Na(+)/K(+) -ATPase expression and activity in dendritic cells.
28582904	Synaptojanin 1 (SJ1) is a major presynaptic phosphatase that couples synapticvesicle endocytosis to the dephosphorylation of PI(4,5)P2, a reaction needed for the shedding of endocytic factors from their membranes. While the role of SJ1's5-phosphatase module in this process is well recognized, the contribution of its Sac phosphatase domain, whose preferred substrate is PI4P, remains unclear.Recently a homozygous mutation in its Sac domain was identified in early-onsetparkinsonism patients. We show that mice carrying this mutation developedneurological manifestations similar to those of human patients. Synapses of thesemice displayed endocytic defects and a striking accumulation of clathrin-coatedintermediates, strongly implicating Sac domain's activity in endocytic proteindynamics. Mutant brains had elevated auxilin (PARK19) and parkin (PARK2) levels. Moreover, dystrophic axonal terminal changes were selectively observed indopaminergic axons in the dorsal striatum. These results strengthen evidence for a link between synaptic endocytic dysfunction and Parkinson's disease."
28582905	Mutations in the leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) gene are the most common genetic cause of Parkinson's disease. Here, we investigated whether the G2019S LRRK2 mutation causes morphological and/or functional changes at nigro-striatal dopamine neurons. Density of striatal dopaminergic terminals, nigral cell counts, tyrosine hydroxylase protein levels as well as exocytotic dopamine release measured in striatal synaptosomes, or striatal extracellular dopamine levels monitored by in vivo microdialysis were similar between ≥12-month-old G2019S knock-in mice and wild-type controls. In vivo striatal dopamine release was insensitive to the LRRK2 inhibitor Nov-LRRK2-11, and was elevated by the membrane dopamine transporter blocker GBR-12783. However, G2019S knock-in mice showed a blunted neurochemical and motor activation response to GBR-12783 compared to wild-type controls. Western blot and dopamine uptake analysis revealed an increase in dopamine transporter levels and activity in the striatum of 12-month-old G2019S KI mice. This phenotype correlated with a reduction in vesicular monoamine transporter 2 levels and an enhancement of vesicular dopamine uptake, which was consistent with greater resistance to reserpine-induced hypolocomotion. These changes were not observed in 3-month-old mice. Finally, Western blot analysis revealed no genotype difference in striatal levels of endogenous α-synuclein or α-synuclein bound to DOPAL (a toxic metabolite of dopamine). However, Serine129-phosphorylated α-synuclein levels were higher in 12-month-old G2019S knock-in mice. Immunohistochemistry confirmed this finding, also showing no genotype difference in 3-month-old mice. We conclude that the G2019S mutation causes progressive dysfunctions of dopamine transporters, along with Serine129-phosphorylated α-synuclein overload, at striatal dopaminergic terminals, which are not associated with dopamine homeostasis dysregulation or neuron loss but might contribute to intrinsic dopaminergic terminal vulnerability. We propose G2019S knock-in mice as a presymptomatic Parkinson's disease model, useful to investigate the pathogenic interaction among genetics, aging, and internal or environmental factors leading to the disease.
28582906	Mutations in the leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) gene have been identified as an unambiguous cause of late-onset, autosomal-dominant familial Parkinson's disease (PD) and LRRK2 mutations are the strongest genetic risk factor for sporadic PD known to date. A number of transgenic mice expressing wild-type or mutant LRRK2 have been described with varying degrees of LRRK2-related abnormalities and modest pathologies. None of these studies directly addressed the role of the kinase domain in the changes observed and none of the mice present with robust features of the human disease. In an attempt to address these issues, we created a conditional LRRK2 G2019S (LRRK2 GS) mutant and a functionally negative control, LRRK2 G2019S/D1994A (LRRK2 GS/DA). Expression of LRRK2 GS or LRRK2 GS/DA was conditionally controlled using the tet-off system in which the presence of tetracycline-transactivator protein (tTA) with a CAMKIIα promoter (CAMKIIα-tTA) induced expression of TetP-LRRK2 GS or TetP-LRRK2 GS/DA in the mouse forebrain. Overexpression of LRRK2 GS in mouse forebrain induced behavioral deficits and α-synuclein pathology in a kinase-dependent manner.  Similar to other genetically engineered LRRK2 GS mice, there was no significant loss of dopaminergic neurons. These mice provide an important new tool to study neurobiological changes associated with the increased kinase activity from the LRRK2 G2019S mutation, which may ultimately lead to a better understanding of not only the physiologic actions of LRRK2, but also potential pathologic actions that underlie LRRK2 GS-associated PD.
28582907	BACKGROUND: LRRK2 G2019S mutation is associated with increased kinase activity and is the most common mutation associated with late-onset PD. However, the transgenic mouse model has not recapitulated cardinal PD-related motor phenotypes. Non-motor symptoms of PD including cognitive impairments are very common and may appear earlier than the motor symptoms. The objective of this study was to determine whether human LRRK2 with G2019S mutation causes hippocampus-dependent cognitive deficits in mice. RESULTS: Male (LRRK2-G2019S) LRRK2-Tg mice showed impairments in the early portion of the Two-day radial arm water maze acquisition trial as well as in the reversal learning on the third day. However, their performance was similar to Non-Tg controls in the probe trial. LRRK2-Tg mice also displayed impairments in the novel arm discrimination test but not in the spontaneous alternation test in Y-maze. Interestingly, there was no statistically significant locomotor impairment during any of these cognitive test, nor in the locomotor tests including open field, accelerating rotarod and pole tests. Expression of the postsynaptic protein PSD-95 but not the presynaptic protein synaptophysin was lower in hippocampal homogenates of LRRK2-Tg mice. CONCLUSION: Consistent with previous reports in human LRRK2 G2019S carriers, the current data suggests that cognitive dysfunctions are present in LRRK2-Tg mice even in the absence of locomotor impairment. LRRK2 G2019S mutation represses the postsynaptic protein PSD-95 but not the presynaptic protein synaptophysin. This study also suggests that mild cognitive impairment may appear earlier than motor dysfunctions in LRRK2-G2019S mutation carriers."
28582908	The aim of the present study was to further explore the in vivo function of the Leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2)-gene, which is mutated in certain familial forms of Parkinson's disease (PD). We generated a mouse model harboring the disease-associated point mutation R1441C in the GTPase domain of the endogenous murine LRRK2 gene (LRRK2 R1441C line) and performed a comprehensive analysis of these animals throughout lifespan in comparison with an existing knockdown line of LRRK2 (LRRK2 knockdown line). Animals of both lines do not exhibit severe motor dysfunction or pathological signs of neurodegeneration neither at young nor old age. However, at old age the homozygous LRRK2 R1441C animals exhibit clear phenotypes related to the prodromal phase of PD such as impairments in fine motor tasks, gait, and olfaction. These phenotypes are only marginally observable in the LRRK2 knockdown animals, possibly due to activation of compensatory mechanisms as suggested by in vitro studies of synaptic transmission. Thus, at the organismal level the LRRK2 R1441C mutation does not emerge as a loss of function of the protein, but induces mutation specific deficits. Furthermore, judged by the phenotypes presented, the LRRK2-R1441C knock-in line is a valid preclinical model for the prodromal phase of PD.
28582910	Characterization of the LRRK2 Transcript. At the onset of this study LRRK2 was a largely predicted gene with an unknown potential for alternative ORFs, promoters, or exon splicing. To determine the correct and predominant LRRK2 transcript as it exists in human tissue, we performed adapter-mediated 5′ RACE using cDNA derived from human brain. Reverse oligonucleotides positioned in the predicted first, third, or fifth exon of LRRK2 revealed multiple transcription initiation sites (Fig. 1A and Fig. 7, which is published as supporting information on the PNAS web site). In the brain, at least six transcription start sites are present between 48 and 120 bp upstream of the first predicted Kozak sequence. A single and distinct transcription initiation site downstream of the first predicted exon (within intron 1) excludes the complete LRRK2 ORF (Fig. 1B). However, the transcript does not correlate to an obvious ORF that would produce protein of appreciable size. Therefore, the biological significance of this transcript remains unknown. No evidence of alternate LRRK2 exons or protein coding sequence was identified. We verified the presence of endogenous LRRK2 transcript in human tissue and HEK-293T cells by using RT-PCR with oligonucleotide primers situated on the 3′ end of LRRK2 mRNA (Fig. 1C).Next, the exon structure and potential for alternative splicing within LRRK2 was determined in mRNA derived from human substantia nigra tissue. Using oligonucleotides positioned in the identified 5′ and 3′ untranslated regions of LRRK2, full-length LRRK2 transcript (≈7.5 kb) was sequentially amplified and subcloned into a plasmid library (pCR2.1). Twenty clones containing LRRK2 were isolated and examined for alternative splicing by using PCR and sequence analysis. In all 20 clones from this tissue source, 51 exons were present. A cryptic splice site found between exons 50 and 51 (within intron 50) in 3 of 20 clones results in the exclusion of 6 aa near the WD40 domain. Thus, no prevalent alternative splicing in LRRK2 occurs in this tissue source although a cryptic splice site likely produces an alternate LRRK2 protein isoform with a partially altered amino acid sequence near the C terminus.Expression of LRRK2 in Cell Lines. The complete LRRK2 ORF was subcloned into the mammalian expression plasmid pcDNA3.1 in frame with a C-terminal myc-His tag, and the resultant amino acid sequence was compared with the current Entrez database entry for LRRK2 (accession no. AAV63975). Deviations in LRRK2 amino acid sequence used in this study include a Thr for Met at position 2397, corresponding to a common nonsynonomous polymorphism with a heterozygousity near 0.5 (dbSNP accession no. rs3761863). In addition, a Leu is present at position 212 in contrast to Ser; however, the sequence encoding a Ser was not detected in human DNA despite sequencing over 1,000 European cases and controls for the underlying polymorphism (S.B., unpublished observations).Plasmid containing full-length LRRK2 was transiently transfected into HEK-293T cells and analyzed by Western blotting using antibodies directed against either the C-terminal myc tag or three peptide-derived LRRK2 antibodies raised against two distinct regions of the N terminus (JH5517 and JH5518) or the C terminus (JH5514). A single protein corresponding to LRRK2 (≈280 kDa) is detected in transfected cells in addition to several crossreactive proteins apparent in both transfected and nontransfected cells (Fig. 1D). Despite the presence of endogenous LRRK2 transcript in HEK-293T cells (Fig. 1C), no endogenous LRRK2 protein of the appropriate size is apparent by Western blot using the antibodies described here. Similarly, endogenous LRRK2 protein appears expressed at very low levels in adult human brain or whole mouse brain (data not shown).Subcellular Localization of Overexpressed WT and Mutant LRRK2. Mutations in several genes related to neurodegeneration have previously been described to alter cellular localization and hence function of the encoded protein. To determine the cellular localization of overexpressed WT LRRK2 as well as LRRK2 harboring the G2019S and R1441C mutations, transfected HEK-293T cells were imaged by using confocal microscopy (Fig. 2A). Subcellular fractionation performed on cells overexpressing WT or mutant LRRK2 were separated into fractions enriched in cytoplasmic, nuclear, and mitochondrial proteins with successful enrichment assessed by relevant marker proteins (Fig. 2B). Transient expression of either WT or mutant LRRK2 is similar in cells compared with marker proteins. LRRK2 is largely excluded from the nucleus and present in a diffuse organization in the cytosol (Fig. 2 A and B). A significant amount (≈10%) of total LRRK2 is associated with the P10 mitochondrial-enriched fraction. The subcellular distribution of LRRK2 is similar in transfected SH-SY5Y cells (data not shown).To determine whether LRRK2 is associated with the inside or outside of mitochondria, cell lysate enriched in cytosolic and mitochondrial proteins was partially digested with trypsin before fractionation. In this scenario, DJ-1, a known mitochondrial protein that is present in both the matrix and intermembrane space (14), is protected from digestion, whereas LRRK2 is completely digested (Fig. 2C). In addition, the mitochondrial outer-transmembrane protein porin is largely unaffected by brief trypsin exposure as opposed to LRRK2, which implies that LRRK2 is associated with the outer membrane of mitochondria but is unlikely to enter mitochondria. The G2019S and R1441C mutations have no robust effect on steady-state levels or cellular distribution.Metabolism of WT and Mutant LRRK2. Familial-PD-linked mutations in the α-synuclein gene, DJ-1gene, and PINK1 gene may adversely affect protein turnover contributing to the pathogenesis of PD (15). To determine whether mutations in LRRK2 may affect protein turnover, transiently transfected SH-SY5Y cells were treated with the proteasome inhibitor MG-132 or the lysosomal degradation inhibitor ammonium chloride (Fig. 3A). Whereas inhibition of the lysosomal degradation pathway has no effect on LRRK2 turnover, treatment with proteasome inhibitors results in the accumulation of LRRK2 (≈2-fold over 24 h) and the appearance of higher-molecular-weight LRRK2, which may correspond to polyubiquitinated protein. To determine whether LRRK2 is ubiquitinated under normal cellular conditions in SH-SY5Y cells, myc-tagged WT LRRK2 was cotransfected with or without HA-tagged ubiquitin followed by treatment with or without MG-132. Analysis of immunprecipitates confirmed the covalent attachment of ubiquitin to LRRK2 upon proteasome inhibition (Fig. 3B) consistent with polyubiquitination. As expected, ubiquitination of LRRK2 was less pronounced in the absence of MG-132, which is consistent with the idea that the proteasomal turnover of LRRK2 is mediated, at least in part, by polyubiquitination. Experiments using cycloheximide-chase assays to assess protein turnover demonstrate a long but equivalent half-life (>12 h) for WT and mutant LRRK2 in cell lines (data not shown). Thus, familial-linked mutations have no appreciable effect on the ubiquitin-mediated proteasomal turnover of LRRK2. Experiments were repeated using HEK-293T cells with similar results (data not shown).Kinase Activity of WT and Mutant LRRK2. LRRK2 encodes a kinase domain with highest similarity to the MLK motif found in proteins that commonly have both Ser/Thr and Tyr kinase activity. PD-linked mutations in LRRK2 have previously been suggested to affect intrinsic kinase activity, thereby leading to disease (16). To assess the kinase activity of WT and mutant LRRK2, we derived microgram quantities of recombinant LRRK2 at high purity by immunoprecipitation as assessed by silver stain (Fig. 4A). We next developed a kinase assay to measure the ability of WT or mutant LRRK2 to phosphorylate biotinylated MBP. Kinase buffer conditions were first optimized to increase the ratio of LRRK2-mediated phosphorylated MBP versus both background and nonspecific phosphorylation (Fig. 8, which is published as supporting information on the PNAS web site). In preliminary experiments, kinase reaction conditions previously reported for MLK activity also induced the highest level of LRRK2 kinase activity (Fig. 8, buffer C). Interestingly, buffer compositions previously used for other tyrosine kinases or Ser/Thr kinases performed poorly in activity assays, and assays using the tyrosine kinase-specific substrate poly(Glu)tyrosine revealed low but significant levels of LRRK2-mediated phosphorylation (data not shown), consistent with the assignment of LRRK2 as an MLK.The amount of WT or mutant LRRK2 protein per kinase reaction was directly assessed by Western blotting, thereby normalizing the amount of phosphorylated MBP to the amount of LRRK2 in each experiment (Fig. 4B). Background and nonspecific phosphorylation was subtracted from all reactions containing LRRK2 by using immunoprecipitated myc-tagged DJ-1 protein as a negative control (data not shown). The G2019S mutant LRRK2 had significantly greater phosphorylation activity than WT protein (P< 0.05). In addition, we observed a trend toward increased kinase activity of R1441C mutant LRRK2 compared with WT; however, despite repeated experiments, the trend was not significant (P < 0.1, Fig. 4B). Recombinant LRRK2 was unable, under the conditions described here, to appreciably phosphorylate other recombinant proteins with importance in PD including parkin, MAPT, and α-synuclein in preliminary in vitro kinase assays.Autophosphorylation Activity of WT and Mutant LRRK2. Using the same buffer and reaction conditions as in kinase activity assays with MBP, we measured the ability of recombinant LRRK2 protein to phosphorylate itself in the absence of any potential cofactors or activators. The amount of phosphorylated LRRK2 was normalized to the amount of input LRRK2 protein as determined by Western blotting (Fig. 5). Similar to experiments using MBP as a substrate, the G2019S mutant LRRK2 protein demonstrates increased autophosphorylation activity compared with WT protein (Fig. 5C). In these experiments, the R1441C mutation (located outside of the MLK domain) has significantly increased autophosphorylation activity versus WT protein. No other phosphorylation signals were apparent in these experiments, suggesting the absence of contaminating protein kinases, cofactors, or substrates in our immunoprecipitated LRRK2 preparations."
28582911	LRRK2 Expression and Kinase ActivityTo investigate the normal and pathological functions of LRRK2, we generated plasmid vectors for overexpression of wild-type or disease-associated mutant alleles of LRRK2 including G2019S, I2020T, Y1699C, and R1441G (Figures 1A and 1B). A V5/His-epitope tag was added to the amino terminus of each coding sequence to distinguish the plasmid-encoded protein from endogenous LRRK2. Plasmids were transiently transfected into COS7 cells, and cell lysates were analyzed by SDS-PAGE and Western blotting with antibodies specific for the V5 epitope tag or LRRK2. A single 280 kDa protein was observed in cytoplasmic lysates of cells transfected with either wild-type or mutant LRRK2 plasmids, and transfection of LRRK2plasmids led to a minor increase in expression over the normal endogenous level (less than 2-fold; Figure 1B and Figure S1A in the Supplemental Data available online).Lysates from transfected cells were immunoprecipitated using an antibody for the V5 epitope tag, and subsequently the immunoprecipitated complexes were assayed for kinase activity toward purified myelin basic protein (MBP) or myosin light chain (MLC), common substrates for mixed-lineage kinase-related proteins. Wild-type LRRK2 displayed a low level of kinase activity in this assay, whereas the G2019S mutation led to significantly increased kinase activity toward both MBP and MLC (Figure 1B and Figure S1B). These data are consistent with the hypothesis that the G2019S mutation leads to disinhibited kinase activity relative to wild-type LRRK2(Gloeckner et al., 2005, West et al., 2005).Additionally, two short hairpin RNA (shRNA)-based plasmid vectors were generated to inhibit the expression of endogenous rodent LRRK2 by RNA interference (RNAi; see Experimental Procedures). Transfection of either of these plasmids into primary rat cortical cultures or rat C6 glioma cells led to a reduction in the level of LRRK2mRNA and protein to less than 20% of baseline levels, as determined by real-time quantitative rtPCR, Western blotting, and immunocytochemistry with polyclonal antibodies for LRRK2 (Figure 1C and Figures S1C and S1D). Immunocytochemical analysis of primary cortical cultures further revealed the presence of LRRK2throughout the soma and neurite processes of neurons (Figure 1C). Immunocytochemistry with antibodies for the polyhistidine epitope tag or for LRRK2indicated that plasmid-encoded wild-type and G2019S mutant LRRK2 localized similarly to the endogenous protein (Figure S2). The G2019S LRRK2 mutant protein was also present in distinctive spheroid-like inclusions within cellular processes and at intracellular membranous structures (see below).LRRK2 Regulates Neuronal Process MorphologyPrimary cortical cultures were transfected with plasmid vectors encoding wild-type or mutant forms of V5 epitope-tagged LRRK2 (or vector control), along with enhanced green fluorescent protein (eGFP) sequences to allow for the identification of transfected cells (~5% of neurons; data not shown).Overexpression of either of two clinically associated missense mutant forms of LRRK2 within the kinase domain, G2019S and I2020T, led to a dramatic reduction in neurite length and branching evident with respect to both the longest neuronal processes, corresponding to axons, as well as total neurite outgrowth (Figures 1D and 1E and Figure S2C). This was confirmed by antibody staining for axonal and dendritic markers (Figure S3A). Neuronal polarity, as quantified by the ratio of axons to dendrites, appeared unaltered. Overexpression of a Parkinsonism-associated missense mutation in the ROC domain, R1441G, also led to a significant decrease in process length, whereas a mutation within the COR domain, Y1699C, induced a relatively modest decrease in process length that did not reach statistical significance (Figures 1D and 1E). Overexpression of wild-type LRRK2 did not alter neuronal morphology, and the soma size of neurons transfected with either wild-type (wt) or mutant LRRK2 allele cDNA appeared similar to vector control.As Parkinsonism-associated LRRK2 alleles display disinhibited kinase activity and short processes, we hypothesized that neurons deficient in LRRK2 activity may demonstrate extended processes. First, we generated an additional mutant form of LRRK2, K1906M, that is predicted to lie within the ATP-binding segment of the kinase domain (Cobb and Goldsmith, 1995) and has been shown to generate a dominant-negative allele (Cobb and Goldsmith, 1995, Gloeckner et al., 2005). Overexpression of the K1906M allele led to a significant increase in total process length, an effect that was particularly evident with respect to the length of the longest process (Figures 1D and 1E). In a second approach, LRRK2 accumulation was inhibited by RNAi. Cortical neurons transfected with either of two shRNA vectors specific for LRRK2 displayed a prominent increase in neurite length (Figures 1D and 1E and data not shown).LRRK2 Mutations and the Maintenance of Neuronal ProcessesTo distinguish between a role in the generation and the maintenance of process length, we performed a time course analysis of neuronal morphology in cortical cultures transfected with LRRK2 wild-type, G2019S, or I2020T vectors, or with the LRRK2 knockdown shRNA vector. Individual cells were followed by fluorescence microscopy at 6, 9, 12, and 15 days subsequent to transfection. This time course analysis demonstrated that overexpression of PD-associated LRRK2 mutants G2019S or I2020T, but not wild-type LRRK2, led to a progressive decline in the length and branching of neurite processes (Figure 2A and Figure S3B). In contrast, soma diameter was not significantly reduced in the mutant LRRK2 transfected neurons. Time course analysis of LRRK2 shRNA-mediated knockdown in cortical neuron cultures indicated a gradual and progressive increase in neurite process length (Figure 2A).At late time points, decreased neuron survival was evident in neurons that express the Parkinsonism-associated LRRK2 mutant alleles. By day 15 posttransfection, survival was significantly reduced in mutant LRRK2 transfected cortical neurons in comparison to wild-type or vector-only transfected cells, as determined by exclusion of propidium iodide staining and lack of nuclear condensation (45% survival in the G2019S versus 90% in the wild-type or vector transfected cells; p < 0.05; Figures 2B and 2C). Immunocytochemistry for activated caspase-3 demonstrated that the mutant LRRK2 G2019S-transfected cells undergo an apoptotic mechanism of cell death (Figure S3C).Structure/Function Analysis of LRRK2 Reveals a Critical Role for the Kinase DomainTo establish a structure/function relationship of LRRK2 domains, we sought to “rescue” the shRNA knockdown allele phenotype by overexpression of LRRK2cDNA sequences. Transfection of the LRRK2 shRNA vector along with overexpression of wild-type LRRK2 sequences effectively rescues the elongated process morphology phenotype (Figure 2D and Figure S3D). Interestingly, the kinase domain alone is sufficient for functional rescue of the knockdown shRNA phenotype. Deletion analysis revealed that the kinase domain alone is also sufficient for the shortened neurite phenotype in the context of Parkinsonism-associated LRRK2 G2019S allele expression (Figure 2E). Finally, analysis of the phenotype of primary midbrain cultures showed that LRRK2 expression similarly regulates neurite process morphology in dopamine neurons (Figure S4).LRRK2 Mutations Induce tau-Positive Spheroid Axonal Inclusions In VitroProminent spheroid-like aggregates were observed within the neuronal processes in all of the G2019S (37 out of 37) and I2020T (20 out of 20) transfected cortical neurons, but only rarely in vector alone (3 out of 85) or wild-type LRRK2 (4 out of 45) transfected cells, as determined by fluorescence microscopy for the eGFP marker (Figures 3A and 3B). The inclusions stained positively with a monoclonal antibody for the His epitope-tagged G2019S LRRK2 protein. tau protein phosphorylated at serine 202 (phospho-tau), visualized by immunostaining with a phospho-specific antibody, appeared to accumulate specifically in the spheroidal inclusions, but these structures did not stain positively with an antibody for αSyn (Figure 3A and Figure S5).Ultrastructural analyses by electron microscopy revealed that neurons expressing the LRRK2 G2019S mutant allele, but not control vector, display abnormal accumulation of abundant electrodense structures suggestive of swollen lysosomes (Figures 3C and 3D). Additionally, multivesicular bodies (MVBs), distended mitochondria associated with vacuoles, and disrupted cytoskeletal structures are observed. Consistent with these findings, immunohistochemical analysis and confocal microscopy of neurons expressing the G2019S LRRK2 allele revealed prominent membranous structures that stain with antibodies for the lysosomal markers LAMP1 (Figure 4E) and cathepsin D (data not shown). A time course analysis revealed that the inclusions appear by day 6 posttransfection, coincident with the neurite process phenotype (Figure S3D).LRRK2 Mutation in Adult Nigral Dopamine NeuronsWe further analyzed LRRK2 function in adult rat substantia nigra dopamine neurons (DNs) using an adeno-associated virus-2 (AAV-2)-mediated gene transduction model. As the kinase domain of LRRK2 is sufficient to induce the G2019S-associated cellular phenotypes in vitro (Figure 2D), and because of the genome size limitation of viral vectors, we overexpressed the kinase domain alone of either wild-type or G2019S mutant LRRK2. AAV-2 vectors were stereotactically injected into the substantia nigra pars compacta within the ventral midbrain of young adult rats along with GFP vector to allow visualization of transduced cells. After 1 month, rats were sacrificed, and histological examination of the brain was performed. All analyses were performed by an observer blinded to the animal genotype. In the context of G2019S overexpression, and with wild-type LRRK2 overexpression to a lesser extent, dopaminergic axonal processes extending into the striatum displayed prominent abnormal morphology and inclusions (as identified by GFP expression and TH immunostaining; Figures 4A and 4B, n = 8 for each group), consistent with the in vitro phenotype. Immunohistochemical analysis revealed that the inclusions stained positively for phospho-tau (at serine 404) but not for αSyn (Figure 4A and Figure S6). Dopamine neurons in the substantia nigra appeared grossly normal in the context of G2019S LRRK2 expression, but apoptosis was significantly increased, as quantified by nuclear morphology and immunohistochemistry for activated caspase-3 (Figures 4A and 4B and Figure S6). Overexpression of the wild-type kinase domain alone led to the induction of some axonal inclusions, but to a lesser extent than the G2019S mutant.LRRK2 Regulates Neurite Process Morphology in the CNSAxonal processes appeared to be reduced in complexity in the context of G2019S expression relative to vector control in the adult rat gene transduction model (Figure S6C), but this was difficult to quantify due to the high density of neuronal processes in the intact CNS. To circumvent this, we used a technique that allows for the marking of individual genetically altered neurons within an otherwise normal CNS environment: in utero intracerebral gene transduction of rat embryos by vector injection into the lateral ventricles. Genetic manipulation of neuronal progenitors within the periventricular cell layer of E16 rat embryos can be achieved by either plasmid vector electroporation or lentiviral transduction (Tsai et al., 2005). After a 5 day period in utero, the embryos (E21) are sacrificed, and brain sections are visualized by confocal fluorescence microscopy. Electroporation of vector alone labels neuronal cells throughout layers 1 and 2 of the cerebral cortex that appear morphologically as neurons and are immunostained with a neuronal marker, Tuj1 (Figure S6D). Overexpression of PD-associated mutant LRRK2 alleles, G2019S or I2020T, dramatically reduced both the length and the branching of neuronal processes, relative to control vector (Figures 4C and 4D), consistent with the phenotype observed in neuronal primary cultures. In contrast, cortical neurons transduced with LRRK2 shRNA display a significant increase in the number of branch points relative to control vector-transduced cells (Figures 4C and 4D). Also, total axon length appeared to be increased in the knockdown cells, although this did not reach statistical significance. In summary, LRRK2 appears to regulate neuronal process morphology in the intact CNS, consistent with the primary culture analysis"
28582912	LRRK2 forms a complex with Hsp90 in vivoTo investigate how the G2019S mutation in LRRK2 causes neuronal dysfunction in vivo, we generated a conditional transgenic mouse model in which the expression of C-terminal HA-tagged human LRRK2 was under the control of a tetracycline-responsive regulator. The expression of mutant LRRK2 protein was detected in the forebrain after having been crossed with CaMKII—tTA transgenic mice (supplemental Fig. 1, available at www.jneurosci.org as supplemental material). Using a HA affinity column, we purified LRRK2-associated protein complexes from transgenic mouse brains to identify any proteins that might interact with mutant LRRK2 in vivo. Proteins specifically present in mutant mouse brains, including LRRK2 and a pair of proteins with an apparent molecular weight of ~90 kDa, were identified by silver staining (Fig. 1A). Mass spectrometry revealed that these 90 kDa proteins were two splice variants of Hsp90: Hsp90α and Hsp90β. The appearance of Hsp90 in the LRRK2-containing protein complex was further confirmed by immunoblot analysis with an Hsp90-specific antibody after immunoprecipitation of HA-tagged LRRK2 from transgenic mouse brains (Fig. 1B). This observation that LRRK2 forms a complex with Hsp90 in vivo is consistent with previous in vitro studies (Gloeckner et al., 2006; Dachsel et al., 2007).Hsp90 functions in concert with a set of cochaperones that link Hsp90 to distinct classes of client proteins (Pearl and Prodromou, 2006). The mammalian homolog of the yeast cell cycle control protein Cdc37 acts as a kinase-specific target subunit for Hsp90. Cdc37 was also coimmunoprecipitated with LRRK2 (Fig. 1C). Other cochaperones, including Hsp70, Hsp70/Hsp90-organizing protein (HOP), and p23, however, did not show the same interaction with LRRK2 (Fig. ​(Fig.1D,1D, ​,2A2A).Hsp90 inhibitor disrupts the formation of the LRRK2/Hsp90 complexThe chaperone activities of Hsp90 are ATP dependent. GA, which interferes with the association of Hsp90 and ATP, specifically inhibits Hsp90 chaperone activity in cells (Chiosis et al., 2004). To examine whether the formation of the LRRK2/Hsp90 complex depends on Hsp90 chaperone activity, we immunoprecipitated LRRK2 from LRRK2-transfected HEK-293 cells after a short treatment with GA (1 μm). We found that treatment of GA effectively disrupted the coimmunoprecipitation of both WT and G2019S mutant LRRK2 with endogenous Hsp90 and Cdc37 in HEK-293 cells (Fig. 2). These data demonstrate that the formation of the LRRK2/Hsp90 complex is dependent on the chaperone activity of Hsp90. Interestingly, more constitutive heat shock protein 70 (Hsc70) was pulled down with LRRK2 after treatment of GA. Because Hsc70 is involved in protein folding, the dissociation of LRRK2 with the Hsp90-mediated chaperone complex likely results in misfolding of LRRK2 and more binding of LRRK2 with Hsc70-mediated chaperone complex.Inhibition of Hsp90 reduces the steady level of LRRK2 expression in cell linesHsp90 is known to regulate the function and stability of many protein kinases (Sreedhar et al., 2004). To investigate whether the activity of Hsp90 is required for the stability of LRRK2, we transfected WT and G2019S mutant LRRK2 into HEK-293 cells and treated the transfected cells with Hsp90 specific inhibitor PUH71 at different doses. Similar to GA, purine-scaffold derivative PU-H71 also disrupts the association of Hsp90 with ATP, resulting in inhibition of Hsp90 chaperone activity (Rodina et al., 2007). Furthermore, whereas GA activity could be modulated by a reductive environment in the cell, resulting in effects that are not a direct consequence of Hsp90 inhibition (Kelland et al., 1999), PU-H71 is not metabolically sensitive to the cellular environment (Rodina et al., 2007). Both G2019S (Fig. 3A) and WT LRRK2 (Fig. 3B) displayed a comparable sensitivity to PU-H71-mediated Hsp90 inhibition in HEK-293 cells (Fig. 3C) (IC50-G2019S of 130.0 nm vs IC50-WT of 112.0 nm, n = 4; p = 0.86). Similar results were also obtained when WT and G2019S LRRK2-transfected HEK-293 cells were treated with GA and another Hsp90 inhibitor, PU-DZ8 (data not shown).To investigate whether Hsp90 inhibitors generally suppress the overall steady level of protein expression in cells, we examined the expression of human α-synuclein A53T in transfected HEK-293 cells after treatment with 500 nm GA. Consistent with previous observations (Auluck and Bonini, 2002; Klucken et al., 2004; Auluck et al., 2005; Flower et al., 2005), the steady level of α-synuclein expressed in transfected HEK-293 cells was not affected by Hsp90 inhibition (Fig. 3D).Inhibition of Hsp90 reduces the steady level of mutant and endogenous LRRK2 in cultured neuronsTo investigate whether the activity of Hsp90 is required for the stability of LRRK2 in neurons, we examined the expression of LRRK2 in primary cultured cortical neurons derived from nontransgenic (ntg) and LRRK2 G2019S mutant pups after treatment with Hsp90-specific inhibitors. Treatment of neurons with GA suppressed the steady levels of both mutant and endogenous LRRK2 expression in both a dose-dependent (Fig. 4A) and time-dependent (Fig. 4B) manner. It appears that the exogenous G2019S LRRK2 was more sensitive to GA treatment than endogenous protein (Fig. 4C) (IC50-G2019S of 4.7 nm, 95% CI of 1.6–13.6 nm vs IC50-endogenous of 37.2 nm, 95% CI of 11.8–117.5 nm, n = 4; p < 0.05). Similarly, the suppression of LRRK2 expression was also observed when neurons were treated with PU-H71 (Fig. 4D) (IC50-G2019S of 26.9 nm, 95% CI of 8.3–87.2 nm vs IC50-endogenous of 387.0 nm, 95% CI of 144.9–1000 nm, n = 4; p < 0.0001). The increased sensitivity of G2019S mutation to Hsp90 inhibition is likely a result from the greater expression of mutant LRRK2 in neurons (supplemental Fig. 1 B, available at www.jneurosci.org as supplemental material). In line with this notion, heterologous expression of WT and G2019S LRRK2 in HEK-293 cells had a comparable sensitivty to Hsp90 inhibition (Fig. 3C). These observations suggest that the alteration of the apparent IC50 of Hsp90 inhibitors is attributable to increased expression levels rather than an LRRK2 mutation. Nonetheless, lower concentrations of GA and PU-H71 could be used to selectively suppress the expression of G2019S mutant but not endogenous LRRK2 protein in neurons derived from LRRK2 transgenic mice.To investigate whether Hsp90 inhibitors interfere with the transcription of the LRRK2 gene, the expression of mutant and endogenous LRRK2 messenger RNA was quantified by real-time RT-PCR in vehicle- and GA-treated neurons. No significant difference between expression of mutant and endogenous LRRK2messenger RNA was found (data not shown), suggesting that Hsp90 inhibitors suppress the LRRK2 expression via inhibition of the chaperone activities of Hsp90 rather than interference with the transcription of LRRK2.Hsp90 regulates the stability of LRRK2To investigate whether Hsp90 plays a role in maintaining the stability of LRRK2 in cells, we examined the t1/2 of both WT and G2019S mutant LRRK2 proteins in transfected HEK-293 cells after treatment with 1 μm PU-H71 (Fig. 5A). The t1/2 for untreated WT and G2019S mutant LRRK2 were comparable (Fig. 5B,C)(t1/2-WT of 8.66 h, 95% CI of 5.22–25.30 h vs t1/2-G2019S of 8.51 h, 95% CI of 4.94–30.81 h; r2 = 0.96; n= 2). Meanwhile, the t1/2 of WT and G2019S mutant LRRK2 proteins in PU-H71-treated cells were significantly reduced compared with vehicle-treated cells (Fig. 5B, C)(t1/2-WT of 0.75 h, 95% CI of 0.49–1.59 h vs t1/2-G2019S of 0.83 h, 95% CI of 0.54–1.73 h; r2 = 0.95; n = 2). These data demonstrate that Hsp90 is critical for maintaining the stability of both WT and mutant LRRK2 in cells.The Hsp90 inhibitor-induced suppression of LRRK2 expression is mediated by the proteasome-dependent protein degradation pathwayHsp90 client proteins tend to be degraded via the proteasome-dependent pathway during chaperone inhibition (Goryunov and Liem, 2007). Concordantly, the GA-induced suppression of mutant and endogenous LRRK2 was selectively blocked by a protea-some inhibitor, MG132, but not the lysosome inhibitor chloroquine in neurons (Fig. 6A, B). These observations demonstrate that LRRK2, like other Hsp90 client proteins, are stabilized by Hsp90 against proteasome-mediated protein degradation.Hsp90 inhibitor rescues the axonal outgrowth deficits of neurons expressing the LRRK2 G2019S mutationA previous report indicates that LRRK2 is involved in maintaining the extension and branching of neurites (MacLeod et al., 2006). Mutant LRRK2, particularly the G2019S mutation but not wild-type LRRK2, causes neurite shortening via a potential autophagy-mediated pathway (Plowey et al., 2008). Consistent with this observation, we recently found that neurons derived from LRRK2 G2019S transgenic mouse brains also displayed retarded axonal outgrowth during neuron morphogenesis (C. Xie, unpublished data). To determine whether Hsp90 inhibitors are capable of rescuing the axonal growth deficit in LRRK2 G2019S transgenic neurons by suppressing mutant LRRK2 expression, we treated the neurons with PU-H71 immediately after they were plated onto culture dishes. We used PU-H71 at 40 nm, which significantly suppressed the expression of mutant LRRK2 but had a minimal effect on endogenous LRRK2 (Fig. 4D). The length of axons, the longest neurites, of vehicle-treated mutant neurons (G2019S) was significantly shorter than that of ntg littermate controls after 2d in culture (Fig. 7A, B,E) (lengthG2019S of 68.30 ± 2.73 μm, n = 79 vs lengthntg of 93.75 ± 4.87 μm, n = 48; p < 0.001). PU-H71 significantly increased the length of axons of mutant neurons compared with treatment with vehicle (Fig. 7D,E) (lengthG2019S/H71 of 112.47 ± 7.04 μm, n = 45; p < 0.001). As a positive control, treatment with Dox, which suppresses the expression of mutant LRRK2 through the tetracycline responsible regulator, also rescued the axon growth defect of mutant neurons (Fig. 7C,E) (lengthG2019S/Dox of 96.58 ± 4.09 μm, n = 62; p < 0.001). In contrast, no significant alteration of axon length was detected in vehicle-, Dox-, and PU-H71-treated nontransgenic neurons (Fig. 7F). These results demonstrate that Hsp90 inhibitors can ameliorate mutant LRRK2-elicited loss of axonal outgrowth."
28582913	LRRK2 is the causative gene for PARK8 type Parkinson’s disease with autosomal dominant inheritance1,2. Mutations in LRRK2 are the most common genetic cause of familial and nonfamilial Parkinson’s disease3–5. Most individuals with LRRK2 mutations have dopamine neuron loss in substantia nigra and Lewy body pathology, typical features of idiopathic Parkinson’s disease6. Notably, some individuals with LRRK2mutations also have tauopathy in the absence of Lewy pathology. Tauopathy and hyperphosphorylated tau are common features of several neurodegenerative diseases7,8. The pathogenesis of Parkinson’s disease resulting from LRRK2 mutations and the more common sporadic forms remains elusive, and a major obstacle to research has been the lack of valid mouse models that recapitulate some of hallmarks of the Parkinson’s disease phenotype9.To generate LRRK2 transgenic mouse models, we obtained a human bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) clone containing full length LRRK2 and verified it by sequencing (Supplementary Methods online). The BAC clone was engineered and confirmed to carry R1441G, a common missense mutation in large family pedigrees and with nearly complete penetrance1,2 (Supplementary Figs. 1–3 online).Both wild-type and LRRK2R1441G transgenic mice were generated (Supplementary Fig. 4 online). Among independent transgenic mouse lines, the RP135 and RP57 lines expressed LRRK2R1441G approximately five- to tenfold above the level of endogenous mouse Lrrk2 (Supplementary Fig. 5 online). Transgene expression was detected in the cortex, cerebellum, striatum and ventral midbrain (Supplementary Fig. 5), consistent with previous reports10. The LRRK2R1441G mice developed normally. At 3 months of age, there was no deficit in body weight, brain weight (data not shown) or motor activity (Fig. 1a).The LRRK2R1441G mice, but not nontransgenic littermate controls, had age-dependent and progressive motor-activity deficits, beginning with reduced mobility that was reminiscent of hypokinesia in Parkinson’s disease. By 10–12 months of age, the hypokinesia in most LRRK2R1441G mice had progressed to a visually apparent immobility, reminiscent of akinesia in late Parkinson’s disease, in the absence of weakness. These motor deficits in 10–12-month-old LRRK2R1441G mice were observed in both home cage activity (Supplementary Video 1 online) and open field (Supplementary Videos 2 and 3 online), and were confirmed and quantified by the cylinder test (Fig. 1a and Supplementary Videos 4 and 5 online). Levodopa and a direct-acting dopamine agonist, apomorphine, both reversed the deficits in the above-mentioned tasks in mice with severe motor deficits (Fig. 1b and Supplementary Videos 6–8 online). Thus, the LRRK2R1441G transgenic mice faithfully recapitulated the progressive motor deficits and responsiveness to levodopa that are characteristic of human Parkinson’s disease.We also generated transgenic mice that overexpressed wild-type LRRK2 (WT-OX). The transgene expression in WT-OX mice was comparable to that in LRRK2R1441G mice (Supplementary Fig. 6 online). The WT-OX mice developed normally and did not demonstrate progressive motor behavioral deficits (Supplementary Fig. 6). Therefore, the phenotypes that we observed in LRRK2R1441G mice were the results of the mutation rather than an overexpression of the LRRK2 protein.To explore whether the hypokinesia in LRRK2R1441G mice was associated with a deficiency of striatal dopamine as in human Parkinson’s disease, we carried out intrastriatal microdialysis in awake and freely moving mice. In the presence of the dopamine re-uptake blocker nomifensine, we observed a significant reduction of extracellular dopamine in LRRK2R1441G mice (P = 0.03; Fig. 2), indicating that dopamine release was indeed impaired.In histological analysis, there was no observable cell death or gliosis in the spinal cord, and we found no general abnormalities in brain structures in 9–10-month-old LRRK2R1441G transgenic mice (data not shown). Immunohistochemistry for tyrosine hydroxylase in 9–10-month-old LRRK2R1441G mice revealed that dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra pars compacta (SNpc) (A9) and ventral tegmental area (A10) were normal in number and anatomical organization (Fig. 3a and Supplementary Methods). We identified two abnormalities of the SNpc dopamine neurons: a decrease (8%, P = 0.01) in average cell body size and a marked diminution in the number of tyrosine hydroxylase–positive dendrites (29%, P = 0.007) in the substantia nigra pars reticulate (Fig. 3a and Supplementary Methods).Although the overall pattern and optical density of tyrosine hydroxylase immunostaining in the striatum of LRRK2R1441G mice appeared normal (Fig. 3b and Supplementary Methods), profound abnormalities were observed at the cellular level in LRRK2R1441G mice, but not in nontransgenic littermate controls or WT-OX mice. In LRRK2R1441G mouse striatum and piriform cortex, two areas that were enriched in dopaminergic projections, tyrosine hydroxylase–positive axons appeared to be beaded and fragmented and exhibited spheroids and dystrophic neurites (Fig. 3c,d and Supplementary Methods), as described in other forms of axonal injury11–13. Axonal pathology of fragmentation and spheroid formation has been observed in the striata of individuals with Parkinson’s disease14.Given that tauopathy has been identified in the brains of individuals with Parkinson’s disease resulting from LRRK2 mutations, we performed immunohistochemistry with the AT8 monoclonal antibody, which recognizes a phosphorylated tau epitope15. In dorsal striatum and piriform cortex of LRRK2R1441G mice, but not in nontransgenic littermate control or WT-OX mice, we observed AT8 immunopositive abnormal axonal swellings and dystrophic neurites, similar to those defined by tyrosine hydroxylase staining (Fig. 3d). Furthermore, biochemical analysis revealed that tau is hyperphosphorylated in brain tissues of LRRK2R1441G transgenic mice (Fig. 3e).LRRK2R1441G BAC transgenic mice offer, for the first time, a model of Parkinson’s disease, derived from a known genetic cause, that successfully recapitulates the motor behavioral, neurochemical and histopathological features of the human disease. These mice will be a powerful tool for in vivo mechanistic studies and therapeutic development."
28582914	Mutations in the leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) gene are the most common known cause of Parkinson's disease (PD). Whether loss of LRRK2 function accounts for neurodegeneration of dopamine neurons in PD is not known, nor is it known whether LRRK2 kinase activity modulates the susceptibility of dopamine (DA) neurons to the selective dopaminergic toxin, 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP). To better understand the role of LRRK2 in DA neuronal survival and its role in the susceptibility of DA neurons to MPTP, we generated LRRK2 knock-out (KO) mice lacking the kinase domain of LRRK2. Here, we show that LRRK2 KO mice are viable and have no major abnormalities and live to adulthood. The dopaminergic system is normal in LRRK2 KO mice as assessed via HPLC for DA and its metabolites and via stereologic assessment of DA neuron number in young and aged mice. Importantly, there is no significant difference in the susceptibility of LRRK2 KO and wild-type mice to MPTP. These results suggest that LRRK2 plays little if any role in the development and survival of DA neurons under physiologic conditions. Thus, PD due to LRRK2 mutations are likely not due to a loss of function. Moreover, LRRK2 is not required for the susceptibility of DA neurons to MPTP.  Histopathology and Clinical pathology  The offspring of the heterozygous crosses gave rise to all three genotypes and 7 to 10% of the homozygous mice are not viable (Table 1). The oldest homozygous mice currently have lived to 2 years of age. No general abnormalities are noted in newborn through young adult LRRK2 KO mice and they appear normal in their growth rates and fertility. A cohort that included 26 LRRK2 KO and 19 WT mice was aged and analyzed at 16-20 months of age. The brain and non-brain tissues were analyzed separately. Alopecia of the skin is commonly observed in the LRRK2 KO mice (data not shown). The alopecia is usually centered on the muzzle and head and is interpreted as being due to excessive grooming. Splenomegaly is also common in KO mice. However, even though the average spleen size of KO mice was larger than in WT mice (KO = 263±65 mg, n=30; WT = 200±49 mg, n=19) the difference is not significantly different as some WT mice of the same age had splenomegaly and some KO mice had spleens of normal size. Although there was some mild individual variation, no consistent alterations in the automated CBC, serum chemistry, or histopathology screens distinguish LRRK2 KO from WT mice (data not shown).  Nigrostriatal dopaminergic system in LRRK2 KO mice  LRRK2 KO animals show no differences in brain development and gross anatomy. Gross histological examination of the brain reveals normal morphology in LRRK2 KO mice of different ages (data not shown). Total content of DA, serotonin and its metabolites in different brain regions were analyzed in KO and WT age-matched littermate mice. No significant changes in the levels of neurotransmitters are observed (Table 2). We examined striatal tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) immunoreactivity in LRRK2 KO and WT age-matched littermate mice. There is no difference in the dopaminergic innervation of the striatum in 2-3 month (data no shown) and 18-24 month old mice (Fig. 2A and B). The number of dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra pars compacta (SNpc) was assessed by TH immunoreactivity (Fig. 2C and D). We performed stereological quantification of TH- and Nissl-positive neurons in SNpc (Fig. 2E). We did not find significant differences in the number of dopaminergic neurons in SNpc of 2-3 month and 18-22 month LRRK2 KO mice compared with WT mice (Fig. 2E). In addition, we determined the concentration of DA and its metabolites in the striatum and we observed no change in the levels of DA and its metabolites, 3,4-dihydroxyphenylactic acid (DOPAC) and homovanillic acid (HVA) in KO mice compared with WT age-matched littermate (Fig. 2F and G).  LRKK2 KO susceptibility to MPTP-Induced nigrostriatal Neuronal Death  Since LRRK2 is localized, in part, to mitochondria (Biskup et al., 2006) and studies suggest that it may play an important role in mitochondrial function (Iaccarino et al., 2007; Ng et al., 2009; Saha et al., 2009), the vulnerability of nigral dopaminergic neurons to the neurotoxin, MPTP, was assessed (Fig. 3). Two to three month old WT and KO mice were injected with MPTP (20 mg/kg every two hours, four times) or saline. The effects of MPTP 7 days after the MPTP treatment were examined histologically. Immunostaining in LRRK2 KO and WT SNpc sections showed decreased TH-positive neuron numbers (Fig. 3B and D) compared with saline-treated controls (Fig. 3A and C). Quantitation of TH- and Nissl-positive neuron numbers in MPTP-treated LRRK2 KO and WT mice shows a significant loss of dopaminergic neurons in mice treated with MPTP (Fig. 3E) and striatal dopaminergic nerve terminals (data not shown), but unexpectedly no significant differences are observed between KO and WT mice. HPLC analysis reveals a significant reduction in striatal dopamine and its metabolites (DOPAC and HVA) in WT and LRRK2 KO mice injected with MPTP compared to saline controls (Fig. 3F). However, no statistical differences in the levels of dopamine and its metabolites after MPTP administration are observed between WT and KO mice (Fig. 3F). Since LRRK2 and alpha-synuclein are found in a percentage of Lewy bodies, sections were immunostained for alpha-synuclein in KO and WT mice treated with saline or MPTP. No difference in staining was observed between groups (data not shown). 
28582915	Generation of LRRK2 and α-synuclein inducible transgenic miceAs described previously (Wang et al., 2008), we have generated LRRK2 inducible transgenic mice in which the expression of carboxyl-terminal hemagglutinin (HA)-tagged human wild-type (WT), G2019S, or kinase-deletion (KD) mutant LRRK2 was under the transcriptional control of tetracycline operator (tetO) (Figure 1A). To make the KD expression construct, we deleted residues from 1887 to 2102 of LRRK2, resulting in a complete deletion of its kinase domain. In parallel with the generation of LRRK2 inducible transgenic mice, we also used the same strategy to generate new lines of human α-synuclein (α-syn) A53T inducible transgenic mice (tetO-A53T). Given the expression pattern of LRRK2 (Galter et al., 2006) is similar to that of calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II-alpha (CaMKII) in the brain, we crossbred tetO-LRRK2 and tetO-A53T mice with a line of CaMKII promoter-controlled tetracycline transactivator (tTA) (CaMKII-tTA) mice (Mayford et al., 1996) to achieve high level expression of LRRK2or α-syn in the forebrain regions. Accordingly, our previous in situ hybridization experiments showed that the expression of human LRRK2 was mainly detected at the olfactory bulb, cerebral cortex, hippocampus and striatum in the brain of tetO-LRRK2 and CaMKII-tTA double transgenic mice (Wang et al., 2008). For simplicity, we will later refer to the tetO-LRRK2 and CaMKII-tTA double transgenic mice as LRRK2WT, G2019S, and KD transgenic mice, respectively. We generated five independent lines of LRRK2WT, three independent lines of G2019S, and three independent lines of KD transgenic mice. We refer to the E3 line as the G2019S transgenic mice and the C74 line as the LRRK2 WT expression line (LRRK2WT) in later studies. In both G2019S and LRRKWT mice, the expression of LRRK2 protein was increased by about 8 to 16-fold compared to the endogenous one (Figure 1B, Supplemental Figure S1B). Additionally, we designate line C77 as the LRRK2 WT low expression line (LRRK2WT-L) and line D10 as the KD mice. In the brain homogenate of KD mice, a doublet of LRRK2-positive bands was detected in which the lower one likely represents the exogenous human LRRK2 with truncated kinase domain (Figure 1B). The expression level of exogenous human LRRK2 between LRRK2WT-L and KD transgenic mice was comparable, which was about 8 to 16-fold less than that of LRRK2WT mice (Supplemental Figure S1C). Therefore, the expression of LRRK2 was only modestly increased (< 1-fold) in the brain of LRRK2WT-Land KD mice as compared to nTg controls (Figure 1B). Q-RT-PCR was used to quantify the expression of exogenous LRRK2 in the brain of LRRK2WT-L and KD mice. The transcription of exogenous LRRK2mRNA was about 5 and 15-fold increase in the brain of LRRK2WT-L and KD mice as compared to nTgcontrols (Supplemental Figure S1D). The rather lower accumulation of exogenous LRRK2 protein in the KD mouse brain may likely reflect the instability of this mutant protein.Under the same transcriptional activation of CaMKII promoter-controlled tTA, the expression pattern of human α-syn was the same as that of LRRK2 transgene in the brain (Figure 1C, upper panel). Administration of doxycycline (DOX) suppressed the expression of exogenous α-syn in this “tet-off” system (Figure 1C, middle panel). The expression level of human A53T α-syn protein was increased by about 30-fold as compared to endogenous protein (Figure 1D, Supplemental Figure S1B). Noticeably, under the CaMKII promoter only a small fraction (<5%) of midbrain DA neurons expressed the transgene (Supplemental Figures. S1E–G). Therefore, we focus our studies on the cortex and striatum where the exogenous α-syn and LRRK2 are widely expressed.G2019S inducible transgenic mice developed similar locomotor abnormalities as A53Ttransgenic miceAll lines of LRRK2WT, G2019S, and KD transgenic mice were viable and developed normally. G2019Smice appeared to gain less body weight compared to non-transgenic (nTg) and tetO-G2019S single transgenic mice starting at 12 months of age (Supplemental Figure S2A, p < 0.0001). However, no significant difference in body weight was found between G2019S and CaMKII-tTA mice (Supplemental Figure S2A). The motor functions of G2019S mice were examined by Rotarod and Open-field tests. G2019S mice performed normally in the Rotarod test (Supplemental Figure S2C). However, they displayed significantly increased ambulatory activities starting at 12 months of age (Figure 1E, p < 0.05). G2019S mice also showed a trend of increased rearing activities, but it did not reach the statistic significance (Figure 1G). In addition, there were no apparent motor phenotypes detected in LRRK2WT mice up to 6 months of age (Supplemental Figure S2F–H). By contrast, A53T transgenic mice weighted significantly less starting at 4 months of age (Supplemental Figure S2B, p < 0.0005), and began to display drastic increases of ambulatory activities at 2 months of age (Figure 1F, p < 0.0001) and elevated rearing activities at 6 months of age (Figure 1H, p < 0.05). Together, the motor behavioral studies suggest that over-expression of G2019S LRRK2 and A53T α-syn in the forebrain regions may induce a similar damage to the neural circuitry responsible for regulating motor activities.A53T inducible transgenic mice developed progressive neuropathological abnormalities compared to G2019S transgenic miceTo determine if any neuropathological abnormalities developed in A53T and G2019S transgenic mice, we examined the brain sections of mutant and control animals for neurodegeneration and associated astrocytosis and microgliosis. The neurodegeneration was revealed by Jade C and cleaved-caspase 3 staining. The presence of reactive astrocytes was examined by staining for glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP). The morphology of microglia was visualized by staining for ionized calcium binding adaptor molecule-1 (Iba1). Both Jade C and c-caspase 3 staining were negative in the brain sections derived from 20-month old G2019S transgenic mice (Figures 2Ad, 2Bd; Table 1). Consistently, stereological studies revealed no significant changes in neuron counts at both the frontal cortex and dorsal striatum between G2019S and age-matched nTg mice (Figure 2E–G). In addition, no apparent increase of reactive astrocytosis or microglial activation was observed in the striatum and cortex of G2019S transgenic mice as compared to control nTg animals (Figure 2; Table 1 and Table 2). Similarly, no obvious gross neuropathological phenotypes were found in 12-month old LRRK2WT transgenic mice (Table 1, Supplemental Figures S2I–L).No apparent neuropathological abnormalities were detected in the striatum of 3-month old A53T mice (Figures 2Aa–2Da). Such neuropathology became obvious when A53T transgenic mice were examined at 12 and 20 months of age (Figure 2; Table 1 and Table 2). Widespread neurodegeneration was evident in the brains of 20-month old A53T transgenic mice (Figures 2Ac–2Bc, 2E). Massive neuronal loss in the frontal cortex (>80%) and dorsal striatum (>74%) of A53T mice was estimated by unbiased stereological approaches (Figures 2F–G). Therefore, A53T mice developed age-dependent, progressive neruodegeneration; whereas, G2019S mice did not show any obvious gross neuropathological phenotypes.LRRK2 accelerated the progression of A53T α-syn-mediated neuropathologyTo test whether over-expression of LRRK2 affects A53T α-syn-mediated neurodegeneration, we generated A53T/LRRK2WT-L, A53T/LRRK2WT, A53T/G2019S and A53T/KD double transgenic mice and examined the progression of neuropathological alterations (Figure 3). Compared to 1-month old A53T single transgenic mice, the number of GFAP-positive astrocytes was significantly elevated in the striatum of age-matched A53T/LRRK2WT-L and A53T/LRRK2WT double transgenic mice (Figures 3A, 3E). In addition, more GFAP-positive astrocytes were found in the brain of A53T/LRRK2WT mice than A53T/LRRK2WT-Lmice (Figures 3A, 3E), suggesting that the expression level of LRRK2 influences the progression of α-syn-mediated neuropathology. A similar increase of microglial activation was also observed in A53T/LRRK2WT-L and A53T/LRRK2WT double transgenic mice (Figures 3B, Table 2). Besides gliosis, neurodegeneration was also accelerated in the striatum of A53T/LRRK2WT-L and A53T/LRRK2WTtransgenic mice (Figure 3, Table 1). Co-staining of caspase 3 with Ctip2, a specific marker for striatal medium-size spiny neurons (MSN) (Arlotta et al., 2008), revealed that most of these degenerating neurons were MSNs (Supplemental Figure S3). The prevalence of neurodegeneration in A53T/LRRK2WT double transgenic mice was also elevated in a LRRK2 dose-dependent fashion (Figure 3F, Table 1). Taken together, these findings demonstrate that over-expression of LRRK2 accelerates the progression of α-syn-mediated neuropathology.Since the G2019S mutation in LRRK2 causes late onset PD, we decided to investigate whether the G2019S mutation would further enhance the neuropathology in A53T/G2019S mice as compared to A53T/LRRK2WT double transgenic mice. A significant exacerbation of astrocytosis, microgliosis, and neurodegeneration was observed in the striatum of A53T/G2019S mice as compared with age-matched A53T single transgenic animals (Figure 3; Table 1 and Table 2). When we compared the pathological phenotypes of 1-month old A53T/LRRK2WT and A53T/G2019S mice, we found the number of Jade C-positive and GFAP-positive cells, and the activation of microglia were significantly increased in the striatum of A53T/G2019S mice as compared to A53T/LRRK2WT animals (p < 0.0001, 0.005, and 0.002, respectively; Figure 3E; Table 1 and Table 2). However, when we compared the numbers of neurons remained in the striatum of A53T/LRRK2WT and A53T/G2019S mice, the difference was not statistically significant (p = 0.14, Figure 3F). To further investigate whether the kinase domain of LRRK2 is critical in regulating α-syn A53T-mediated neuropathology, we compared the progression of neuropathology between A53T/KD and A53T/LRRK2WT-L transgenic mice. As shown in Figure 3, the presence of kinase-deletion LRRK2 also accelerated A53T-mediated neuropathology to a similar extent as LRRK2WT-L (Figure 3 and Table 1–Table 2). These data suggest that the kinase domain of LRRK2 perhaps is not critical in modulating A53T-induced neuropathological abnormalities.We further examined the neurodegeneration of A53T, A53T/LRRK2WT, and A53T/G2019S mice at 6 months of age (Figures 3G–H). While no obvious neuronal loss was observed in both LRRK2WT and G2019S mice, a significant reduction (30%) of striatal neurons was found in A53T single transgenic mice (Figures 3G–H, p < 0.02). More dramatic neuronal loss was detected in the dorsal striatum of A53T/LRRK2WT (80%) and A53T/G2019S (85%) mice (Figures 3G–H, p < 0.001 and 0.0001). However, the numbers of residual neurons in the dorsal striatum of A53T/LRRK2WT and A53T/G2019S mice were not statistically different (p = 0.45, Figure 3H). These observations from adult mice further support our earlier findings that the presence of excess WT and G2019S LRRK2 exacerbates A53T-mediated neurodegeneration and the expression level of LRRK2 rather the PD-related G2019S mutation perhaps is more important in accelerating A53T α-syn-mediated pathogenesis.With the concern whether over-expression of any exogenous protein could accelerate α-syn-mediated neuropathology, we crossbred A53T mice with a line of green fluorescent protein (GFP) transgenic mice that selectively express GFP in striatal neurons (Gong et al., 2003). We did not observe any significant influence of GFP on the progression of neuropathology in A53T/GFP double transgenic mice (Figure 3E, Supplemental Figure S4). In addition, to test if LRRK2 selectively potentiates A53T-mediated neuropathology, we crossbred G2019S mice with amyloid precursor protein (APP) inducible transgenic mice in which an Alzheimer’s disease-related double mutant version of chimeric mouse/human APP is over-expressed 10 to 30-fold compared to the endogenous APP (Jankowsky et al., 2005). We found that LRRK2 did not accelerate APP-mediated astrocytosis and microgliosis in APP/G2019S double transgenic mice (Supplemental Figure S5). Together, these observations support a specific effect of LRRK2 on the pathogenesis of α-syn A53T mutation.LRRK2 promoted the abnormal accumulation of α-syn in cell bodiesThe α-syn staining is normally confined to axon terminals (Maroteaux et al., 1988), which was shown here as small puncta in the coronal striatal sections of 3-month old A53T mice and 20-month old nTg mice (Figure 4). Interestingly, a few neurons with strong α-syn staining in the cell body were detected in the brain sections of 12-month old A53T mice (Figures 4B, 4F). The occurrence of this abnormal somatic accumulation of α-syn was more prominent in the brain sections of 20-month old A53T mice (Figures 4C, 4G; Table 3), which was closely correlated with the progression of neurodegeneration in A53Tmice, suggesting that the somatic accumulation of α-syn may trigger the pathogenic cascades leading to the cell death. We then investigated whether over-expression of LRRK2 affects the subcellular distribution of α-syn. No obvious α-syn staining was found in the cell body of striatal neurons in 1 month-old A53T mice (Figure 4I). However, co-expression of LRRK2 G2019S mutation greatly promoted the accumulation of α-syn in the soma of A53T/G2019S neurons in 1-month old mice (Figures 4J–L; Table 3). Similarly, increasing numbers of neurons with somatic accumulation of α-syn were detected in brain sections of 1-month old A53T/LRRK2WT-L, A53T/LRRK2WT and A53T/KD transgenic mice in a LRRK2 dose-dependent manner (Figure 4M–4P; Table 3). To investigate whether over-expression of LRRK2 G2019S mutation also promotes the accumulation of WT α-syn in the cell bodies, we examined the α-syn staining in brain sections from 20-month old G2019S mice and 1-month old human α-syn WT and G2019S double transgenic mice (α-synWT/G2019S). No apparent α-syn staining was detected in the soma of neurons in G2019S and α-synWT single transgenic mice (Supplemental Figure S6). By contrast, somatic staining of α-syn was apparent in neurons of 1-month old α-synWT/G2019S double transgenic mice (Supplemental Figure S6). These results suggest that the LRRK2-induced somatic accumulation of α-syn is independent of the presence of PD-related α-syn mutation but relies on the expression level of α-syn.The staining of LRRK2 seemed to partially overlap with that of α-syn in the soma (Figures 4L, 4P). However, co-immunoprecipitation experiments failed to pull down LRRK2 and α-syn together from brain homogenates of A53T/G2019S and A53T/LRRK2WT mice (unpublished data). In addition, a few neurons, which showed obvious α-syn staining in the soma, were lack of substantial expression of LRRK2 transgene (asterisk, Figures 4L, 4P). These observations suggest that LRRK2 may not directly bind to α-syn and prevent its trafficking to the axon terminals.LRRK2 promoted the formation of α-syn aggregatesTo examine if increased somatic accumulation of α-syn correlates with the formation of α-syn aggregates, we compared the levels of α-syn protein in total and sequentially detergent-extracted fractions of brain homogenates from 1 and 12-month old A53T transgenic mice. The formation of α-syn aggregates was detected as α-syn-positive high molecular weight (HMW) bands in the total brain homogenates of A53Tmice (Figure 5). Interestingly, the intensity of HMW bands was significantly enhanced in the samples of 12-month old A53T mice as compared to 1-month old animals (Figure 5A). We then examined the presence of α-syn aggregates in the Triton X100-insoluble (TX-insol) fractions of brain extracts. While the level of Triton X100-soluble (TX-sol) α-syn was comparable between these two age groups, a significant increase of TX-insol HMW α-syn was found in the samples of 12-month old A53T mice (Figure 5B). These data indicate the accumulation of α-syn in the soma may favor the formation of α-syn aggregates or vise versa.Since over-expression of LRRK2 promoted the somatic accumulation of α-syn, we reasoned that LRRK2may also promote the aggregation of α-syn. We therefore compared the level of HMW α-syn in the total brain lysates of 1-month old A53T and age-matched A53T/G2019S transgenic mice. A modest increase of HMW α-syn was detected in the A53T/G2019S samples (Figure 5C). Similarly, significantly more α-syn was detected in the TX-insoluble fraction of brain homogenates from A53T/G2019S transgenic mice (Figures 5D–E, p = 0.033). Together, these observations indicate that G2019S LRRK2 promotes the formation of α-syn aggregates in neurons.To test if α-syn is a potential substrate of LRRK2’s kinase activity, we examined the phosphorylation of α-syn in total brain homogenates derived from one-month old A53T and A53T/G2019S transgenic mice (Figures 5D–E). Unexpectedly, we observed a reduction of α-syn phosphorylation at serine 129 in the brain lysate of double transgenic mice compared with that of A53T single transgenic animals (p = 0.001). This observation indicates that α-syn is unlikely to be a physiological substrate of LRRK2’s kinase activity in vivo. Secreted α-syn is also implied in the pathogenesis of PD (Lee et al., 2005). To investigate if LRRK2 affects the secretion of α-syn, we measured the level of α-syn in cerebral spinal fluid (CSF) by ELISA. We found no significant alteration of secreted α-syn in A53T/G2019S double transgenic mice as compared to A53T single transgenic mice (data not shown).Co-expression of LRRK2 and A53T led to severe fragmentation of Golgi complex in neuronsRecent studies indicate that over-expression of either WT or PD-related mutant α-syn disrupts ER-Golgi traffic and causes Golgi fragmentation (Cooper et al., 2006;Gosavi et al., 2002). Interestingly, LRRK2 is associated with Golgi apparatus (Biskup et al., 2006). We therefore decided to examine the ER and Golgi structures in neurons of A53T and LRRK2 single and double transgenic mice. There was no apparent change of ER structure in these neurons as revealed by calnexin staining (data not shown). However, the structure of Golgi complex was drastically altered in neurons of 1-month old A53T/LRRK2 double transgenic mice (Figure 6). The morphology of Golgi apparatus was examined by GM130 and GLG1 staining, which recognizes cis and medial/trans-Golgi apparatus respectively. GM130 staining revealed tubular structures largely stacked at one side of neurons in 1-month old nTg and A53T mice (arrows, Figures 6A, 6D), which was classified as “Normal” Golgi. The GM130-positive tubules, however, appeared thinner and fragmented in neurons of LRRK2WT and G2019S mice (Figures 6B–C). When A53T was co-expressed with either WT or G2019S LRRK2, severe fragmentation of cis-Golgi was found (asterisk, Figures 6E–F), which was designed as “Fragmented” Golgi thereafter; and the partially fragmented Golgi was referred as “Intermediate” Golgi. Interestingly, the degree of Golgi apparatus fragmentation was correlated with the somatic accumulation of α-syn in these neurons (asterisks, Figures 6H–I). By contrast, neurons that lacked substantial α-syn staining in the soma displayed fairly normal appearance of cis-Golgi network (arrows, Figures 6E–F, Figures 6H–I). The prevalence of cis-Golgi fragmentation was quantified, which showed a significant decrease of “Normal” Golgi in LRRK2single and A53T/LRRK2 double transgenic neurons as compared to nTg controls (Figure 6P). Meanwhile, the ratio of “Fragmented” Golgi was significantly elevated in neurons of A53T/LRRK2 double transgenic mice (Figure 6P). We also examined the integrity of cis-Golgi network in striatal neurons of 6-month old animals and observed a similar fragmentation of GM-130-posotive Golgi apparatus in LRRK2WT, G2019S, and A53T/LRRK2 double transgenic neurons (Supplemental Figure S7). Interestingly, a significant increase of Golgi fragmentation was observed in neurons of 6-month old A53T mice (Supplemental Figure S7).We then checked the structural integrity of medial/trans- Golgi in neurons of A53T and LRRK2 mutant mice. In control nTg mice, GLG1 staining revealed the “Normal” perinuclear and polarized localization of Golgi stacks in neurons (arrows, Figure 6J). However, GLG1-staining was significantly altered in LRRK2WT, G2019, and A53T neurons and was shown as tubular structures scattered around the nucleus (arrowheads, Figures 6K–M). In A53T/LRRK2WT and A53T/G2019S neurons, with a few exceptions (arrowheads, Figures 6N–O,), the GLG1-staining was dispersed as small puncta or became indistinguishable from the background staining (asterisks, Figures 6N–O). We classified these dispersed structures as “Fragmented” Golgi. The ratio of “Fragmented” trans-Golgi was calculated, which was significantly increased in A53T and LRRK2 single and double transgenic neurons as compared to nTgcontrols (Figure 6Q). Increased fragmentation of Golgi apparatus was also observed in neurons of KD and A53T/KD mice (Figures 6P–Q). Together these observations demonstrate that over-expression of LRRK2and α-syn severely disrupted the structure of Golgi apparatus, which may impair the ER/Golgi trafficking and contribute to the somatic accumulation of α-syn.Over-expression of LRRK2 perturbed the dynamics of microtubule assembly in LRRK2and A53T/LRRK2 transgenic miceMicrotubule and microtubule-based intracellular transport play a critical role in maintaining the structure and function of Golgi apparatus (Thyberg and Moskalewski, 1999). LRRK2 has been shown to physically interact with both α and β tubulin through its GTPase domain (Gandhi et al., 2008;Gillardon, 2009). Consistently, we found that both WT and G2019S LRRK2 co-stained with βIII tubulin in the soma and proximal processes of striatal neurons in 1 and 6-month old LRRK2 single and A53T/LRRK2 double transgenic mice (Figure 7; Supplemental Figure S8). A significant overlap of somatic α-syn and βIII tubulin staining was also observed in neurons of 6-month old A53T single transgenic mice (Supplemental Figure S8) as well as in neurons of 1 and 6-month old A53T/LRRK2WT and A53T/G2019S double transgenic mice (Figures 7Dc–Dd, Supplemental Figure S8). These observations were consistent with the previous report that prefibrillar cytoplasmic α-syn interacts with tubulin in cell cultures (Lee et al., 2006).To reveal the functional impact of LRRK2 over-expression on the dynamics of microtubule organization, we compared the level of β-tubulin in both the Reassembly High-salt Buffer (RAB)-soluble and insoluble fractions of mouse brain homogenates from 1-month old A53T, LRRK2WT and G2019S single, and A53T/LRRK2 double transgenic animals as well as nTg controls (Figures 7G–I). RAB buffer is generally used to extract intracellular free tubulin and cold-labile microtubules from brain homogenates (Weingarten et al., 1975). A dramatic reduction of β-tubulin was observed in the RAB-soluble (RAB-S) fraction of brain homogenates in LRRK2WT, G2019S, and A53T/LRRK2 transgenic mice as compared to nTg controls and A53T single transgenic mice (Figures 7G–H). Concomitantly, more β-tubulin was found in the RAB-insoluble pellets (RAB-P) of LRRK2 over-expressing mouse brains as compared to nTg and A53T samples (Figures 7G, 7I). The total level of β-tubulin, meanwhile, was comparable among all different genotypes (Supplemental Figure S9). The distribution of α-tubulin followed the same pattern as β-tubulin in the RAB-extracted brain homogenates from LRRK2 transgenic mice (data not shown). Taken together, these findings are consistent with previous in vitro assays that over-expression of LRRK2 may enhance the polymerization of tubulin in cells (Gillardon, 2009), suggesting that the impairment of microtubule assembly may affect the organization of microtubule network in the cell, resulting in the fragmentation of Golgi apparatus.Over-expression of LRRK2 and A53T impaired ubiquitin-proteasome system in both A53Tand LRRK2 transgenic miceα-syn aggregates have been shown previously to impair the proteasomal and lysosomal activities that leads to accumulation of ubiquinated proteins in cells (Cuervo et al., 2004;Tanaka et al., 2001). Consistently, an elevation of ubiquitin (Ubi) staining was observed in the soma and nucleus of cortical neurons from 6-month old A53T mice (arrows, Figure 8Aa) but not from nTg controls (Figure 8Ae). The Ubi staining was partially overlapped with α-syn (Figure 8Ca). The pattern of Ubi staining was altered in 20-month old A53T mice, which displayed a punctuated staining pattern at neuron processes with no apparent co-localization with α-syn staining (arrowheads, Figures 8Ab, 8Cb). In the presence of excess WT LRRK2, a slightly more α-syn and Ubi-positive clusters were observed in brain sections of 6-month old A53T/LRRK2WT mice (arrowheads, Figure 8Bc). Interestingly, the presence of G2019S seemed to alter the Ubi-staining pattern to a more perinuclear location in neurons of A53T/G2019S mice (arrow, Figure 8Ad).We then examined the Ubi staining in LRRK2 transgenic mice. The level of Ubi staining was increased in cortical neurons of 6-month old LRRK2WT and G2019S mice (Figure 8D). Interestingly, the occurrence of Ubi-positive clusters was more prominent in G2019S neurons (arrowheads, Figure 8D). These Ubi-positive clusters appeared co-stained with LRRK2 in G2019S neurons (arrowheads, Figure 8F). This phenomenon became more apparent in neurons of 20-month old G2019S mice in which LRRK2 and Ubi staining were tightly co-localized as clusters (arrowheads, Figure 8Fe). Moreover, the presence of A53T α-synaccelerated the clustering of LRRK2 staining in neurons of A53T/G2019S mice (arrowheads, Figures 8Ed, 8Fd) as compared to age-matched G2019S mice (Figures 8Dc, 8Fc). In contrast, no obvious LRRK2-positive clusters were found in neurons of 6-month old LRRK2WT and A53T/LRRK2WT mice (Figures 8Da–b, 8Fa–b). Taken together, these observations indicate that G2019S LRRK2 may further inhibit UPS activities, resulting in more frequent formation of LRRK2 and Ubi-positive aggregates in neurons of aged G2019S mice (Figures 8De, 8Ee). Our studies also indicate that the presence of A53T α-syn and G2019S LRRK2 may cause synergistic impairment of ubiquitin-proteasome system (UPS) activities, which further accelerates the formation of LRRK2/Ubi-positive aggregates in neurons of A53T/G2019S double transgenic mice (Figures 8Dd, 8Ed).In parallel with immunohistological studies, we also checked the levels of ubiquitinated proteins in brain homogenates of A53T, LRRK2WT, G2019S, A53T/LRRK2WT, and A53T/G2019S mice by Western blots (Figure 8G). A significant elevation of ubiquitination was observed in the brain homogenate of 3-month old A53T and A53T/LRRK2WT mice as compared to age-matched nTg, LRRK2WT, and G2019S mice (Figure 8H). The level of ubiquitination, however, was only moderately increased in the brain samples of 18-month old G2019S mice compared to age-matched nTg controls (Figures 8G–H).LRRK2 exacerbated mitochondrial structural and functional abnormalities in neurons of A53T transgenic miceMitochondrial dysfunction has been shown in cell and mouse models over-expressing PD-related mutant α-syn (Hsu et al., 2000;Martin et al., 2006). We examined the morphology of mitochondria in striatal neurons of 1-month old mice by EM and found distinctive structural changes in some of the mitochondria in A53Tand A53T/G2019S neurons. Compared to nTg and G2019S samples, the matrix of these abnormal mitochondria was denser (large arrows in Figures 9C–D, 9G–H), and the cristae became widened (small arrows in Figure 9G). The frequency of such abnormal mitochondria was 52/1000 µm2 in striatal area of A53T mice and ~3.5 times higher in A53T/G2019S double transgenic mice (184/1000 µm2); whereas virtually none was found in age-matched nTg or G2019S transgenic mice (Figures 9A–D). The abnormal mitochondria were preferentially distributed in dendrites/soma, with only a few in axon terminals (unpublished data). The mitochondrial structural abnormalities were also confirmed by immunostaining with an antibody against cytochrome c oxidase subunit I, a mitochondrial inner membrane protein (supplemental Figure S10).To address whether the morphological abnormalities affect the function of mitochondria in striatal neurons of 1-month old A53T and A53T/G2019S transgenic mice, we infused the animal with MitoSox Red, a fluorescent dye for detecting the surplus of mitochondrial superoxide released to the matrix (Robinson et al., 2006). MitoSox Red signal was easily detected in the brain of A53T/G2019S transgenic mice and was more prominent in the dorsal lateral striatum (Figures 9L–M), where most neurodegeneration was found. In contrast, only a few MitoSox Red-positive neurons were found in the stratum of A53T mice (arrowhead, Figure 9K) and no positive staining was detected in nTg or G2019S transgenic mice (Figures 9I–J). These results suggest that co-expression of α-syn and LRRK2 cause synergistic toxicity to mitochondria.Inhibition of LRRK2 expression ameliorated α-syn-mediated neuropathologySince over-expression of LRRK2 accelerated the progression of α-syn-induced neuropathological abnormalities, we decided to investigate whether inhibition of LRRK2 expression was able to alleviate the pathogenesis of mutant α-syn. To inhibit LRRK2 expression, we generated LRRK2 knockout (LRRK2−/−) mice (Supplemental Figure S11). LRRK2−/− mice were viable, fertile, and displayed no obvious motor behavioral phenotypes (Supplemental Figure S12). No apparent elevation of reactive astrocytosis, neurodegeneration, or somatic accumulation of α-syn was found in brains of 20-month old LRRK2−/− mice (Supplemental Figure S12; Table 1–Table 3). Furthermore, the levels of α-syn in Triton-X100 insoluble fraction appeared comparable between LRRK2+/+ and LRRK2−/− mice, indicating no apparent α-syn aggregates were formed in LRRK2−/− mouse brains (data not shown). Compared to littermate controls, only a moderate increase of activated microglia (Supplemental Figure S12; Table 2) was observed in the brain of 20-month old LRRK2−/− mice.To generate A53T mice in the LRRK2 knockout background (A53T/LRRK2−/−), we intercrossed tetO-A53T/LRRK2+/− and CaMKII-tTA/LRRK2+/− mice to get A53T/LRRK2−/−and littermate control mice. The neuropathology of A53T/LRRK2−/− mice and littermate controls was examined at 6 and 12 months of age (Supplemental Figure S13; Figure 10). Similar to A53T/LRRK2+/+ mice, 12-month old A53T/LRRK2+/−mice also displayed significant neurodegeneration, astrocytosis, microgliosis, somatic accumulation of α-syn and severe fragmentation of Golgi apparatus in the striatum (Figure 10). In contrast, no apparent neurodegeneration was found in the striatum of age-matched littermate A53T/LRRK2−/− mice (Figure 10Ab; Table 1). The number of residual neurons in the striatum of 12-month old A53T/LRRK2−/− is also significantly more as compared to age-matched A53T/LRRK2+/− and A53T/LRRK2+/+ mice (Figure 10F). Moreover, no significant elevation of astrocytosis, microgliosis, or somatic accumulation of α-syn was detected in the striatum of 12-month old A53T/LRRK2−/− mice (Figure 10; Table 2 and Table 3). GLG1 staining revealed normal morphology and distribution of Golgi apparatus in neurons of A53T/LRRK2−/−mice (Figures 10Eb, 10J). Similar rescuing effects were also observed in the brain of 12-month old A53T/LRRK2+/+ mice treated with doxycycline (A53T/DOX) (Figure 10). Stereological analyses further revealed significant reduction of neurodegeneration in A53T/DOX mice as compared to age-matched A53T/LRRK2+/+ mice (Figure 10F). In addition to immunohistological analyses, Western blots revealed a significant decrease of HMW α-syn in the total brain homogenates of A53T/LRRK2−/− mice as compared to age-matched A53T/LRRK2+/− mice (Figures 10G, 10I). By contrast, only a moderate decrease of HMW-Ubi was observed in A53T/LRRK2−/− samples (Figure 10G), which did not reach statistical significance by the densitometry analysis. Together these findings demonstrated that inhibition of LRRK2 expression successfully ameliorated α-syn-mediated neuropathological abnormalities in A53T transgenic mice."
28582916	BAC transgenic mice overexpressing FLAG-tagged LRRK2-Wt or LRRK2-G2019SWe identified a mouse BAC containing the entire genomic sequence of LRRK2. The BAC was genetically engineered by first inserting a FLAG tag after the start codon ATG to induce overexpression of LRRK2-Wt, then introducing a G-to-S mutation at amino acid 2019 to induce G2019S mutant overexpression (LRRK2-G2019S) (Fig. 1A) (Fig. S1A, B). We performed repeated genetic crosses of these BAC transgenic mice to a nearly isogenic background of C57BL/6J; two mouse lines that expressed similar protein levels for LRRK2-Wt and LRRK-G2019S were selected for further characterization. Immunoblots of total brain lysate with anti-LRRK2 antibody confirmed similar expression levels (approximately 6-fold higher than endogenous LRRK2 protein, Fig. 1B) in these LRRK2-Wt and LRRK2-G2019S lines. The specificity of the anti-LRRK2 antibody used was shown previously (Li, et al, 2007) and was further confirmed here using brain tissue from LRRK2 knockout mice (Fig. S1C). We also confirmed the presence of the G2019S mutation in LRRK2-G2019S mice by examining messenger RNA (mRNA) using RT-PCR, followed by restriction enzyme digestion (Fig. S1D). As expected for BAC transgenics, immunohistochemical analysis showed similar brain expression patterns for LRRK2-Wt and LRRK2-G2019S in many areas of brain such as cerebral cortex, striatum, substantia nigra, internal capsule and hippocampus, whether stained with anti-LRRK2 (Fig. S2A) or anti-FLAG antibodies (not shown). Total transgene expression levels in different regions of brain, analyzed by Westernblot analysis, are also comparable between LRRK2-Wt and LRRK2-G2019S mice (Fig. S2B). Both mouse lines had the usual number of pups and expected gender ratio (not shown), showing no major impairment in embryonic development. Anatomic evaluation showed no obvious brain abnormalities in either LRRK2-Wt or LRRK2-G2019S mice up to 18 months (Fig. S2C).Decreased striatal DA content in LRRK2-G2019S miceGiven the key role of striatal DA loss in PD, we first determined tissue striatal DA content in the two BAC transgenic lines. Striatal DA levels, determined by HPLC analysis, were not changed significantly in LRRK2-Wt (224 ± 7 ng/mg protein, n = 6 mice) or LRRK2-G2019S (223 ± 6 ng/mg protein, n = 6 mice) versus control (246 ± 9 ng/mg protein, n = 8 mice) mice at 6 months (P > 0.05). However, at 12 months, LRRK2-G2019S mice had ~25% lower levels of DA and its metabolite homovanillic acid (HVA) than controls (P < 0.05), whereas levels in LRRK2-Wt mice were again unaltered (Fig. 1C,D). This suggests an age-related decline of striatal DA content in LRRK2-G2019S mice.To determine whether TH, the biosynthetic enzyme for DA is altered in the transgenic lines, we examined TH protein levels, enzymatic activity, and post-translational modification of the TH protein associated with its activity. However, we found no differences in striatal TH protein levels, enzymatic activity or phosphorylation state (P-Ser 31 and P-Ser 40) among LRRK2-Wt, LRRK2-G2019S and control mice at 10 months (Fig. 2A, B,C), suggesting that the decrease in striatal DA content is not due to impaired TH activity. Furthermore, we found no changes in the levels of other proteins involved in regulating presynaptic DA levels including the vesicular monoamine transporter-2 (VMAT2), the plasma membrane DA transporter (DAT) or D2 DA receptors (D2Rs) by Western blot analysis (Fig. 2A).Opposing effects of LRRK2-Wt versus LRRK2-G2019S on striatal DA release and uptakeTo examine functional consequence of Wt and mutant LRRK2 overexpression on exocytotic DA release, we used fast-scan cyclic voltammetry (FCV) to monitor evoked DA release in striatal slices from the two BAC transgenic mouse lines at 12 months. Peak extracellular DA concentration ([DA]o) evoked by a single pulse was ~25% higher in LRRK2-Wt than in paired littermate control mice (P < 0.05 vs. control 1) (Fig. 3A). Consistent with the age-dependent decrease of DA content in mice with the G2019S mutation (see above and Fig. 1C), peak evoked [DA]o was ~35% lower in LRRK2-G2019S mice than in littermate controls (P < 0.001 vs. control 2) (Fig. 3A). There was no difference in evoked [DA]o between the two control groups (P > 0.05, control 1 vs. 2). Moreover, evoked [DA]o in LRRK2-G2019S mice did not differ from littermate controls at 6 months (1.54 ± 0.08 μM in LRRK2-G2019S vs. 1.42 ± 0.11 μM in controls, P> 0.05, n = 32 recording sites from 4 mice per group). This result suggests an age-dependent reduction of evoked DA release caused by LRRK2-G2019S overexpression in mice.Evoked [DA]o reflects the net balance between DA release and DA clearance by DAT-mediated uptake. To establish the relative roles of release and uptake in the opposite effects of LRRK2-Wt and LRRK2-G2019S overexpression on evoked [DA]o at 12 months, we fitted the initial falling phase of [DA]o versus time records to the Michaelis-Menten equation to extract the maximum uptake rate, Vmax (Fig. 3B) using a fixed Km of 0.9 μM (Schmitz et al., 2001). The average Vmax pooled from all control mice (control 1 plus control 2) was 3.85 ± 0.11 μM/s (n = 86 sites from 6 mice), which is similar to that reported previously for mouse striatum in vitro (Schmitz et al., 2001; John and Jones, 2007). The Vmax for DA uptake in LRRK2-Wt mice did not differ from that in littermate controls (Fig. 3B). Thus, elevated evoked [DA]o in LRRK2-Wt mice reflects enhanced release, not impaired uptake. In contrast, Vmax was significantly lower in LRRK2-G2019S mice than in littermate controls (P < 0.05 vs. control 2) (Fig. 3B). This indicates that decreasedevoked [DA]o in LRRK2-G2019S is not from enhanced DA uptake, but implies the converse, that decreased uptake might be a compensatory response to impaired DA release after G2019S mutation.Uptake of released DA via the DAT replenishes vesicles for subsequent DA release (Jones et al., 1998). We then assessed the ability of DAergic axon terminals to sustain release with repetitive stimulation in mice at 12 months. In controls, the amplitude of [DA]o evoked at a given site by single pulses at two-minute intervals decreased with the first few stimulations then approached a plateau. In either control 1 or control 2 mice peak [DA]o declined by ~30% by the end of a 20 min monitoring period (P > 0.05, control 1 vs. control 2) (Fig. 4A,B left). This pattern was unaltered in LRRK2-Wt mice (P > 0.05 vs. control 1) Fig. 4A,B middle). In LRRK2-G2019S mice, however, the decline in evoked [DA]o was amplified (P < 0.001 vs. control 2) (Fig. 4A,B right), indicating less robust release in LRRK2-G2019S mice. To avoid confounding factors that might arise from comparing release sites with differing initial peak evoked [DA]o, we also analyzed a subpopulation of the data that included only release sites with a starting evoked [DA]oof ~1 μM. We again found no difference in the decline of evoked [DA]o with time in LRRK2-Wt versuscontrol 1 mice (P > 0.05, n = 5 recording sites per group) and confirmed that evoked [DA]o was poorly sustained in LRRK2-G2019S versus control 2 mice P < 0.001, n = 6 sites per group). These results suggest that overexpression of LRRK2-Wt and LRRK2-G2019S cause contrasting effect on DA transmission in mice; the G2019S mutation may impair striatal DA release, resulting in a decrease in DA levels at striatum (Fig. 1D).Spontaneous hyperactivity and enhanced motor performance in LRRK2-Wt, but not LRRK2-G2019S miceTo investigate how altered striatal DA transmission affects motor function, we performed motor function tests on the two BAC transgenic lines and their respective littermate controls. No differences were seen between the two control groups (P > 0.05 for each test), therefore these data were pooled. In open field analysis, LRRK2-Wt mice showed an increased number of rearing movements compared to LRRK2-G2019S or control mice (Fig. 5A). Overall motor activity of LRRK2-Wt mice was greater than that of either LRRK2-G2019S or controls, with more movement and longer distances traveled in a given time window (Fig. 5B,C). The difference in motor activity between LRRK2-Wt and LRRK2-G2019S or control mice was more prominent at 12 than at 6 months.Motor coordination was tested using a challenge beam task sensitive to dysfunction of the nigrostriatal pathway (Fleming et al., 2004). While crossing a beam covered with metal mesh, LRRK2-Wt mice showed enhanced ability to traverse the full beam length, indicated by fewer total slips (errors) and slips per step, than LRRK2-G2019S or controls. Again, the difference in slips between LRRK2-Wt and LRRK2-G2019S or controls was more pronounced at 12 than 6 months (Fig. 5D-F). In a gait test, the LRRK2-Wt mice showed significantly longer strides, as well as greater diagonal distance between front and hind limbs than LRRK2-G2019S mice (Fig. S3). Thus, enhanced striatal DA transmission may contribute to hyperactivity and better motor performance in LRRK2-Wt mice.In contrast, LRRK2-G2019S overexpression did not alter motor performance, despite similar brain levels and distribution to that seen in LRRK2-Wt mice (Fig. 5). This indicates that 25% lower striatal DA content and release levels (Fig. 1 and ​3)3) does not lead to motor deficits in LRRK2-G2019S mice up to 12 months, consistent with the usual finding that a decrease in striatal DA content of > 50% is typically required before motor deficits appear in human PD or in parkinsonian animal models (Zigmond et al., 1990).Lack of PD-associated pathophysiology with LRRK2-G2019S overexpression, despite elevated kinase activityPrevious studies indicate that LRRK2 protein purified from brain has higher kinase activity than that from other tissues or cultured cells (Li et al., 2007). To examine whether LRRK2-G2019S mutation also stimulates kinase activity over LRRK2-Wt, as reported for human LRRK2 in vitro (West et al., 2005; Gloeckner et al., 2006; Smith et al., 2006; Jaleel et al., 2007), we assayed kinase activities of LRRK2-Wt and LRRK2-G2019S proteins purified from transgenic brains by the FLAG affinity method. Brain kinase activity in LRRK2-G2019S was significantly higher than in LRRK2-Wt, assessed using either phosphorylation of myelin basic protein (MBP) (2.4-fold increase) or auto-phosphorylation (2.7-fold increase) (Fig. 6A). These results suggest a highly conserved mechanism whereby G2019S mutation alters the biochemical (and likely structural) properties of LRRK2, irrespective of the origin of mammalian LRRK2 (e.g., species or tissue).Despite increased brain kinase activity in LRRK2-G2019S mice, no sign of neuronal or other cell death was seen in any brain region, including those with high levels of exogenous LRRK2 or G2019S (e.g., cortex, striatum, and hippocampus; not shown). Stereological cell counting revealed no differences in the number of DAergic neurons (TH positive cells; TH+) in the substantia nigra pars compacta (SNc) in LRRK2-Wt or LRRK2-G2019S versus littermate controls at 6 or 12 months (Figs. ​6B6B and S4A). In addition, nigrostriatal terminals were not grossly altered at 6 or 12 months, with no difference in the optical density or appearance of TH+ staining in dorsal striatum among LRRK2-G2019S, LRRK2-Wt and control mice (Figs. ​6C6C and S4B). There was no apparent abnormality or loss of TH+ immunolabeling in SNc (including distal dendrites in the substantia nigra pars reticulata), internal capsule, or dorsal striatum even at 18-20 months in LRRK2-G2019S or LRRK2-Wt mice (data not shown). This may contribute to the lack of obvious motor impairment in LRRK2-G2019S mice at 12 months (Fig. 5). Importantly, this result further indicates that dysfunctional DAergic transmission caused by LRRK2-G2019S (Figs. ​11,​,33,​,4)4) occurs without apparent degeneration of nigrostriatal terminals or cell bodies at this age.In the absence of the overt loss of DAergic neurons or dystrophic terminals, we investigated other PD-associated pathological markers in these mice. Immunohistochemistry of LRRK2-G2019S and LRRK2-Wt brains up to 18 months showed no increases in levels or aggregation of α-synuclein or ubiquitin, which are found in Lewy bodies in the SNc in PD (not shown). However, staining with anti-phospho-tau antibodies (PHF-1 against pS396/pS404 and CP13 against P S202/T205) showed significantly fewer phospho-tau-positive (+) cells in dorsal striatum of 18 month LRRK2-Wt, compared to control or to LRRK2-G2019S mice (Fig. 6D). This suggests that overexpression of LRRK2 may prevent the accumulation of phospho-tau in brain. Although no obvious change in the number of phospho-tau+ cells was observed in LRRK2-G2019S versus control mice, the significant difference between the two BAC lines suggest a contrasting, thereby inhibitory effect of G2019S on the function of LRRK2 in regulating homeostatic phospho-tau levels."
28582917	Association of LRRK2 with 14-3-3We employed quantitative SILAC-based MS to identify proteins associated with immunoprecipitates of stably expressed full-length GFP–LRRK2 (Figure 1A), as well as the GFP–LRRK2(G2019S) mutant (Figure 1B), derived from HEK-293 cells. The top hits, which were enriched at 10–30-fold higher levels with GFP–LRRK2 or GFP–LRRK2(G2019S) compared with GFP alone, comprised various isoforms of 14-3-3 (Figure 1). The two other major interactors observed were two isoforms of the Hsp90 chaperone associated with its kinase-specific targeting CDC37 (cell division cycle 37) subunit (enriched 5–15-fold). Hsp90 and CDC37 associated with both wild-type LRRK2 and the LRRK2(G2019S) mutant, and have been reported previously to interact with LRRK2 [15]. No other significant interactors of LRRK2 were detected in this screen.We found that endogenous 14-3-3, as well as Hsp90, was co-immunoprecipitated with endogenous LRRK2 from Swiss 3T3 cells (Figure 2A). We also observed that endogenous LRRK2 was co-immunoprecipitated with an antibody that recognizes endogenous 14-3-3 isoforms from Swiss 3T3 cells (Figure 2B). Plasmids encoding expression of seven isoforms of human 14-3-3 were transfected into HEK-293 cells stably expressing full-length FLAG–LRRK2. Following affinity purification, apart from the atypical σ isoform, all other isoforms of 14-3-3 interacted with FLAG–LRRK2 (Figure 2C). As a control we also demonstrated that all 14-3-3 isoforms except 14-3-3σ interacted with endogenous MARK3, a previously characterized 14-3-3 interactor [16].14-3-3 isoforms mostly interact with specific phosphorylated residues on their binding partners [17,18]. To verify whether association of 14-3-3 with LRRK2 was dependent on phosphorylation, we incubated endogenous LRRK2 (Figure 2D) or overexpressed FLAG–LRRK2 (Figure 2E) in the presence or absence of λ phosphatase. λ phosphatase markedly reduced interaction of 14-3-3 with LRRK2 assessed using the overlay assay. This effect was suppressed by the inclusion of the λ phosphatase inhibitor EDTA in the assay (Figures 2D and and2E).2E). Residual binding of 14-3-3 to LRRK2 following λ phosphatase treatment is presumably due to incomplete dephosphorylation of LRRK2.Mapping of major phosphorylation sites on endogenous LRRK2To determine which phosphorylated residue(s) mediate binding to 14-3-3, we performed detailed phospho-peptide Orbitrap MS analysis of endogenous LRRK2 immunoprecipitated from mouse Swiss 3T3 cells (Figure 3A). This revealed three clear phosphorylation sites, namely Ser860, Ser910 and Ser935 (Figure 3B). These residues lie in the N-terminal non-catalytic region of LRRK2 just prior to the leucine-rich repeats (Figure 3C). We also analysed phosphorylation of overexpressed full-length human FLAG–LRRK2 expressed in HEK-293 cells, which confirmed that Ser860, Ser910 and Ser935 were major sites of phosphorylation (Figures 3A and and3B).3B). In addition, we found three other phosphorylation sites in the overexpressed human FLAG–LRRK2 preparation, namely Ser955, Ser973 and Ser976 (Figures 3B and and3C).3C). The phospho-peptides encompassing Ser955, Ser973 and Ser976 were also detected in our analysis of endogenous LRRK2, but owing to the lower abundance of these peptides, we were unable to assign the exact phosphorylation sites (results not shown).￼Phosphorylation of Ser910 and Ser935 mediates 14-3-3 binding, but does not control kinase activityWe observed that mutation of Ser860, Ser955, Ser973, Ser976 or both Ser973/Ser976 phosphorylation sites to an alanine residue did not affect binding of 14-3-3 to full-length FLAG–LRRK2 (Figure 3D). Strikingly, however, mutation of Ser910 and/or Ser935 to an alanine residue abolished 14-3-3 interaction, indicating that phosphorylation of both of these residues is necessary for binding of LRRK2 to 14-3-3 isoforms (Figure 3D). Mutation of Ser910 and/or Ser935 or any of the other identified phosphorylation sites did not affect LRRK2 protein kinase activity (Figure 3D). To study whether phosphorylation of Ser910 and Ser935was sufficient to mediate interaction with 14-3-3 isoforms, we generated a di-phosphorylated biotinylated peptide encompassing Ser910 and Ser935. We observed that when this was conjugated to streptavidin–agarose, it efficiently affinity-purified 14-3-3 isoforms from HEK-293 cell extracts (Figure 3E). Incubation of this peptide with λ phosphatase to dephosphorylate Ser910 and Ser935 prevented interaction with 14-3-3 isoforms, an effect that was not observed when the λ phosphatase inhibitor EDTA was included (Figure 3E).Generation of Ser910 and Ser935 phospho-specific antibodiesWe next generated phospho-specific antibodies recognizing LRRK2 phosphorylated at Ser910 or Ser935. These antibodies were specific, as mutation of Ser910 to an alanine residue ablated recognition of LRRK2 with an anti-phospho-Ser910 antibody and, similarly, mutation of Ser935 abolished recognition with the anti-phospho-Ser935 antibody (Figure 3F). We consistently observed that mutation of Ser910 to an alanine residue reduced phosphorylation of Ser935 approx. 2-fold and the similar mutation of Ser935 reduced phosphorylation of Ser910 approx. 2-fold as quantified by the Odyssey system (Figure 3F). Utilizing these antibodies, we demonstrate that endogenous LRRK2 immunoprecipitated from mouse brain, kidney and spleen was phosphorylated at Ser910, as well as Ser935, and also bound 14-3-3 (Figure 3G).Sequence alignments indicate that the Ser910 and Ser935 sites, as well as residues surrounding them, are highly conserved in mammalian species (Figure 3H). This region encompassing Ser910 and Ser935 is not present in Caenorhabditis elegans or Drosophila melanogaster LRK-1, or, indeed, mammalian LRRK1. Comparison of the residues surrounding Ser910 and Ser935 indicates some striking similarities (Figure 3I, i.e. basic residues at the −3 and −4 positions, a serine residue at the −2 position, an asparagine residue at the −1 position and a large hydrophobic residue at the +1 position).Disruption of 14-3-3 binding induces accumulation of LRRK2 within cytoplasmic pools resembling inclusion bodiesA common role of 14-3-3 proteins is to influence the subcellular localization of the protein to which it binds. We therefore studied whether 14-3-3 binding might affect LRRK2 cellular localization. To ensure low-level expression and as uniform as possible, we generated Flp-in T-REx 293 cells that stably express the wild-type and non-14-3-3-binding Ser910/Ser935 mutant forms of full-length GFP–LRRK2. Immunoblot analysis revealed that the wild-type and mutant GFP–LRRK2 forms were expressed at similar levels (Figure 4A). We next studied the cellular localization using confocal microscopy and found that, consistent with a previous report [19], wild-type LRRK2 was uniformly distributed throughout the cytosol and excluded from the nucleus (Figure 4B). In contrast, the non-14-3-3-binding LRRK2(S910A), LRRK2(S935A) and LRRK2(S910A/S935A) mutants accumulated within cytosolic pools resembling inclusion bodies (Figure 4B).￼Characterization of 14-3-3 binding of 41 LRRK2 PD-associated mutantsWe next decided to investigate the Ser910/Ser935 phosphorylation and 14-3-3-binding properties of 41 PD forms of LRRK2. These mutations include the six most common pathogenic mutations that have been described to date (R1441C, R1441G, R1441H, Y1699C, G2019S and I2020T) [5,6]. Most of the other mutations studied have only been observed in low numbers of PD patients and further work is required to assess the contributions these mutations make to the development of disease [6]. The location of different mutations in LRRK2 analysed is indicated in the Figure 5 (inset). We expressed full-length wild-type and mutant forms of LRRK2 with an N-terminal FLAG epitope tag in HEK-293 cells. LRRK2 was immunoprecipitated and levels of protein were determined by quantitative immunoblotting analysis (Odyssey system). Similar levels of LRRK2 forms were subjected to immunoblot analysis, which revealed that most of the mutants were phosphorylated at Ser910 and Ser935 to a similar extent as the wild-type enzyme and interacted with 14-3-3 (Figure 5, lower panel). However, Ser910/Ser935 phosphorylation and hence 14-3-3 binding were abolished in four mutants (R1441G, Y1699C, E1874stop and I2020T) (Figure 5, lower panel). Phosphorylation of Ser910/Ser935 and 14-3-3 binding were significantly reduced in six other mutants (M712V, R1441H, R1441C, A1442P, L1795F and G2385R) (Figure 5, lower panel).￼We also compared the relative protein kinase specific activity of the 41 mutant forms of LRRK2 employing the LRRKtide peptide substrate [10] (Figure 5). Consistent with previous work [8–10], the LRRK2(G2019S) mutant possessed approx. 3-fold higher specific activity than wild-type LRRK2. Two other mutants, LRRK2(R1728H) and LRRK2(T2031S), also exhibited 2- and 4-fold increased activity respectively compared with wild-type LRRK2. Apart from the R1874stop mutation that lacks the kinase domain and is therefore inactive, all other mutants tested possessed similar activity to wild-type LRRK2.Association of 14-3-3 with endogenous LRRK2 is impaired in LRRK2(R1441C) knock-in miceTo obtain further evidence that the LRRK2(R1441C) PD mutation disrupts 14-3-3 binding, we compared levels of 14-3-3 associated with endogenous LRRK2 derived from previously reported littermate wild-type and homozygous LRRK2(R1441C) knock-in mice [20]. LRRK2 was immunoprecipitated from spleen, kidney and brain from three separate mice of each genotype. Immunoblotting and 14-3-3 overlay analysis demonstrated that level of LRRK2 expression was similar in the wild-type and knock-in mice, however, the level of Ser910/Ser935 phosphorylation and associated 14-3-3 was markedly reduced in tissues derived from LRRK2(R1441C) knock-in mice compared with wild-type (Figure 6). The largest effect of the knock-in mutation was observed in kidney.￼Cellular localization of 41 mutant forms of LRRK2To ensure low-level expression and as uniform as possible of the wild-type and mutant forms of full-length GFP–LRRK2, we generated the Flp-in T-REx 293 cells that stably express the wild-type and mutant forms of GFP–LRRK2. Immunoblot analysis revealed that GFP–LRRK2 forms were expressed at relatively similar levels (Figure 7). The localization of wild-type, kinase-dead and many other LRRK2 mutants studied were uniformly distributed throughout the cytosol and excluded from the nucleus with no accumulation within cytoplasmic pools observed (Figure 7 and Supplementary Figure S1 to view larger images at http://www.BiochemJ.org/bj/430/bj4300393add.htm). Strikingly, most mutants that displayed reduced Ser910/Ser935 phosphorylation and binding to 14-3-3 accumulated within cytosolic pools resembling inclusion bodies (R1441C, R1441G, R1441H, A1442P, Y1699C, L1795F and I2020T). Not counting the truncated E1874stop mutant, which displays diffuse cytoplasmic localization, only two other mutants (M712V and G2385R) displaying reduced Ser910/Ser935 phosphorylation and 14-3-3 binding (Figure 5), but did not accumulate in cytoplasmic pools (Figure 7 and Supplementary Figure S1). It is possible that the ability of these mutants to still interact weakly with 14-3-3 isoforms may prevent their accumulation within cytoplasmic pools. Only a single mutant (R1067Q) was found to interact with 14-3-3 and accumulate within cytoplasmic pools (Figure 7 and Supplementary Figure S1). The reasons for this require further work."
28582918	Generation of Human LRRK2 wild type and G2019S BAC miceThe F1 offspring from transgenic hWT and G2019S founders were characterized for LRRK2 expression and full length human LRRK2 cDNA transcript was found in one hWT and in four G2019S BAC lines. The data for G2019S mice presented in this manuscript are from the highest expressing G2019S line. The presence of the G→A base change was confirmed in human LRRK2 cDNA isolated from G2019S mice (Figure 1A). Regional localization of transgenic mRNA with a Taqman human specific probe (Figure 1B) and finer anatomical mapping via in situ hybridization with mouse and human specific LRRK2 probes revealed that anatomical expression pattern of the human LRRK2 transgene resembled endogenous mouse LRRK2, albeit with higher transgene expression in the hippocampus (Figure 1C). Lrrk2 protein expression was assessed using an in-house specific antibody PA0362 (Melrose et al., 2006) and confirmed protein expression in both hWT and G2019S transgenic lines in most brain regions (Figure 1D). To determine relative expression levels, extracts of half brain from NT, hWT and G2019S animals were immunoblotted with Lrrk2 antibody. Assuming the relative affinity of PA0362 to mouse and human Lrrk2 protein is comparable, in half-brain extracts the G2019S transgenic line was found to have ~2.5-fold protein expression over endogenous mouse Lrrk2 while the hWT line had ~ 3.5-fold protein expression (Supplemental Figure 1A,B). In all of the transgenic LRRK2 lines we generated, the human promoter drove the highest expression levels in the hippocampus. In hippocampal lysates human Lrrk2 protein levels were ~14 fold over murine levels for G2019S and ~20-fold for the hWT line (Supplemental Figure 1C,D).To determine if any compensatory mRNA changes were occurring, a mouse specific LRRK2 probe was used to measure endogenous murine LRRK2 expression in transgenic, versus non-transgenic mice. Murine LRRK2 expression remained consistent in all brain regions in G2019S and hWT transgenic brains compared to non-transgenic (NT) littermates (Figure 2). Similarly, no compensatory mRNA changes were observed in the LRRK2 paralog LRRK1, nor for SNCA and MAPT, two other genes implicated in PD (Figure 2).Dopaminergic system characterizationThe loss of striatal dopaminergic terminals and substantia nigra dopamine neurons is a prominent feature of both LRRK2-associated and idiopathic PD. Stereological counts of TH positive neurons in the substantia nigra in aged hWT and G2019S mice (22–24 months) and age matched NT controls revealed no differences (neuronal estimates were NT = 8254 ± 732, hWT 8134 ± 262 and G2019S 8374 ± 317, Figure 3). Despite the apparent preservation of dopamine neurons in the transgenic mice, we hypothesized that axon terminal dopamine neurochemistry may still be altered. The concentration of dopamine and metabolites DOPAC and HVA was measured by HPLC in tissue punches from the striatum in hWT, G2019S and NT littermates mice aged 18 months. No significant differences were detected between transgenic and NT mice for dopamine nor its metabolites (Supplemental Figure 2), and correspondingly turnover ratios were comparable (data not shown).To further investigate the intact dopaminergic system in vivo, and in particular to measure extracellular dopamine levels, we performed microdialysis in hWT, G2019S BAC and age matched NT controls from each line. Extracellular dopamine levels were measured before and after amphetamine challenge. Amphetamine raises extracellular dopamine levels by inducing calcium-independent dopamine efflux via reverse transport through DAT and by inhibiting dopamine re-uptake (Schmitz et al., 2001). Remarkably we found that baseline dopamine levels were significantly lower (~66%) in hWT (mean ± SEM 2.95±0.23 p<0.0001) and in G2019S BAC mice (~33%, mean 4.96 ± 0.67 pg/μl, Mann Whitney p<0.002) compared to NT controls (7.36 ± 0.76 pg/μl) (Figure 4A). Conversely, the average dopamine levels following amphetamine challenge were comparable in the three groups (hWT 12.37±1.44, G2019S 12.13 ± 1.58 pg/ul and NT 10.31 ± 1.75 pg/μl, Figure 4A). When the post-amphetamine challenge levels for each animal were normalized to the average of their individual basal dopamine levels (i.e. % response) a significant difference was observed between the response in hWT (454 ± 119 % p<0.008) and G2019S BAC (397 ± 85 %, p<0.05) compared to NT controls (156 ± 21 %) after twenty minutes (Figure 4B). These data suggested that while basal dopamine levels were lower in hWT and G2019S mice, reverse transport of dopamine induced by amphetamine was intact. Likewise, this also confirmed that the deficits in extracellular dopamine levels were not due to reduced availability of dopamine stores.Given the lower basal levels of extracellular dopamine levels in the striatum in hWT and G2019S BAC mice compared to NT controls, we hypothesized that compensatory post-synaptic changes may occur over time in striatal dopamine receptors. We thus determined the density of dopamine D1 and D2 receptors in striatum by quantitative autoradiography on tissue sections from 18 month old hWT, G2019S BAC and NT control mice. A modest 11% increase (P<0.01) was observed in D1 receptor density in hWT mice compared to NT controls (mean ± SEM for hWT 48.38 ± 0.85 and NT 42.98 ± 1.89, Figure 5A) however whilst there was a trend towards increased D1 receptors in the G2019S mice, it did not achieve significance (Figure 5B). Similarly, a trend towards increase D2 receptors existed for both hWT and G2019S mice compared to controls but this was not significant (Figure 5C and D). Quantitative DAT immunohistochemistry results suggested no differences in either hWT, nor in G2019S to NT controls (Fig 5E and F) although this does not rule out alterations in DAT activity or cellular localization of the receptor.One of the feedback mechanisms in nigro-striatal neurons is D2 autoreceptor mediated inhibition of synthesis and release. It is well known that antagonizing pre-synaptic D2 autoreceptors can remove this feedback inhibition, and cause increased synthesis as well as release of dopamine (Shi et al., 2000). In order to determine whether the observed extracellular dopamine differences in transgenic BAC mice was due to differential function of D2 receptors, hWT and G2019S BAC mice were treated with the D2 receptor antagonist raclopride, sacrificed 30 minutes later and dopamine and its metabolites measured. As expected, dopamine turnover, as measured by the ratio of dopamine metabolites to stores of dopamine (DOPAC/dopamine and HVA/dopamine) increased dramatically following treatment with raclopride (Supplemental Figure 3). Furthermore, there was a significant increase in levels of serine-40 phosphorylated TH after raclopride treatment, indicating increased synthesis (data not shown). However, there was no difference in this response between hWT or G2019S BAC transgenic and NT littermates suggesting that autoreceptor-mediated feedback is normal in these mice.Neuropathological AnalysisTo assess mice for neuropathological changes we examined LRRK2 transgenic mice aged up to 24 months using immunohistochemistry with neurodegenerative markers commonly observed in PD. No abnormalities in α-synuclein, phosphorylated pSer129 α-synuclein, nor in caspase-3 were observed (data not shown). In contrast, analysis with phospho-tau antibodies revealed that aged G2019S BAC (18–24 months) accumulate phosphorylated tau at epitopes pSer202 (CP-13) and pSer262/356 (12E8) (Figures 6and ​and7).7). The alterations in tau were not present in mice aged 6 or 12 months (data not shown). In aged G2019S mice, phospho-tau immunoreactivity was observed in the neuropil and in cell bodies in several regions throughout the brain, including cortical regions (Figure 6A,C), particularly the parietal association area, pre-limbic, medio-orbital, frontal association, cingulate and somatosensory cortices. In addition reactivity was also observed in hippocampus (Figure 6C), hypothalamus, amygdala and locus coeruleus. Moderate to heavy staining was also noted in white matter fibers in the thalamus, hypothalamus, striatum and midbrain, as well as tracts in the pontine base and medulla (Figure 7). In the hippocampal area phospho-tau pSer 262/356 positive staining was observed in non-neuronal cells that morphologically resembled oligodendroglia (Figure 6C). In general the immunostaining was more robust with the pSer 262/356 antibody compared to the pSer 202 antibody. Iba-1 staining for microglia revealed increased activation in the hippocampus of G2019S mice (Figure 6B), however in other regions of the brain, even those with tau alterations, microglial activation was not remarkable.To further determine the nature of the tau species, we performed western blot analysis with brain lysates from G2019S mice (18–24 months) and age matched NT mice with the pSer202 (CP-13) antibody and pSer396/404 (PHF-1), a phospho-epitope that is normally present in mice in white matter and gray matter (Hernandez et al., 2003). At pSer 202 epitope the most marked differences were observed in the cortex and the hippocampus, corresponding to the regions of highest transgenic expression (Figure 8A). However increased levels of pSer396/404 could be detected in most brain regions (Figure 9A). Following normalization to GAPDH, quantitative analysis for the pSer 202 antibody revealed that the upper ~60kDa band was around two-fold more abundant in G2019S compared to aged matched NT controls in both cortex and hippocampus, whereas the lower ~50kDa band was only slightly elevated. When the upper and lower bands were plotted as a ratio, in both cortex and hipocampus the ratio of the upper band to the lower band was at least 2.5 fold higher in G2019S compared to NTs (Figure 8B). Similarly, for the pSer396/404 epitope, the ratio of the middle ~55kDa to lower ~50 KDa bands, in the striatum, hippocampus, midbrain, cortex and cerebellum, was around 3 fold higher in G2019S compared to NTs (Figure 9B). To determine whether these alterations were due to differences in total tau, immunoblots were run with tau-5, which reacts with phosphorylated as well as non-phosphorylated forms of tau (Figure 9A). The banding pattern of total tau was visibly different between G2019S and NT controls, and in particular the two doublet bands around 50 and 55 kDa were altered in G2019S samples. Upon quantitative analysis it was apparent that the ratio of these two bands was altered in G2019S mice, such that in NT mice the ~50KDa species tended to be more prominent but in G2019S mice the ~55 kDA species tended to be equal or more abundant. When plotted as a ratio of middle/lower band, G2019S mice had at least two fold higher ratios than NT mice for striatum, hippocampus, cortex and midbrain (Figure 9B).We next asked whether the tau alterations were still apparent after dephosphorylation, hypothesizing that a shift in species composition might affect propensity for phosphorylation. Focusing just on the cortex, since it is a region of high Lrrk2 expression and pronounced tau changes, we compared untreated samples with samples dephosphorylated by enzymatic treatment with alkaline phosphatase. We utilized Tau-1, which has a preference for non-phosphorylated tau in axons before enzymatic treatment, but recognizes astrocytes, perineuronal glial cells, as well as axons, cell bodies and dendrites of neurons following enzymatic desphosphorylation (Papasozomenos 1987). The banding pattern for tau-1 in untreated samples (and thus predominantly axonal tau) was identical in NT and G2019S samples, suggesting that axonal tau levels and species composition were unaltered (Figure 10A). However, following dephosphorylation, the tau-1 banding pattern was different between NT and G2019S mice, with a more prominent ~65KDa band appearing in G2019S mice (Figure 10B,C) and a tendency for a shift in the relative intensity between the bands at ~60 and 62kDa (Figure 10D). These results suggest that non-axonal tau species composition is different in G2019S mice and furthermore, because the samples are dephosphorylated, the tau species changes cannot be due to phosphorylation, but instead must be another post-translational modification.Immunohistochemical analysis of hWT mice, despite their higher transgenic expression levels, revealed only modest increases pSer 262/356 (Figure 11), these changes being restricted to the hippocampal area where both cell bodies and processes were immunopositive. Western blotting with tau antibodies did not reveal any remarkable differences (data not shown).Behavioral AnalysisWe characterized hWT, G2019S and a combined age matched NT controls from each line in a battery of behavioral tests, which included motor abilities (beam-crossing test, inked footprint analysis), reactivity to sensory stimulation (negative geotaxis test) and evaluation of general exploratory activity (open-field test). In the beam test, hWT showed a comparable performance to age matched NT controls when crossing both wider and narrower beams (Supplemental Figure 4A). G2019S mice tended to reach the goal cage faster than NT controls, however this was not statistically significant. There was no difference in latency to move, nor in the number of falls from the beam for either hWT or G2019S mice when compared to NT controls (data not shown). In the geotaxis test all mice climbed up the inclined wire grid against the force of gravity indicating comparable motoric, postural and vestibular responses between the genotypes, which substantiated the absence of falling off the beam during the beam crossing test (Supplemental Figure 4B). Inked footprint analysis revealed similar stride-lengths between NT control mice and hWT and G2019S transgenic mice (Supplemental Figure 4 C,D).In the open field test, hWT and NT mice had comparable exploratory profiles, however G2019S mice showed significantly longer exploratory path (p <0.006) compared to NT mice (Figure 12A). Although overall activity levels were not altered (61.64% ± 6.29 NT and 66.72% ± 7.69 G2019S Figure 12B), the G2019S mice showed a trend (p = 0.056) towards greater thigmotaxis (mean ± SEM 55.73 cm ± 8.50 for NT and 80.17 ± 5.84 for G2019S, Figure 12C) searching the arena persistently in the close vicinity of the wall, as well as a tendency to taking less turns (tortuosity was 157.1 °/m ± 53.0 for NT versus 80.1 °/m ± 9.6 path for G9019S mice, Figure 12D) and spent less time exploring the central zone of the arena (4.49% ± 1.72 for NT versus 1.43%, ± 0.77 for G2019S, Figure 12E) including the novel object (2.07% ± 0.89 NT versus 0.93 ± 0.49 G2019S, Figure 12F). Post-hoc analysis revealed that the G9019S mice showed significantly faster walking speed (p < 0.05) in the arena (0.25 m/s ± 0.02 SEM) than NT mice (0.18 m/s ± 0.02 respectively). Taken together our data indicate that while performance for sensory and motor tasks appear equivalent in NT, hWT and G2019S mice, when placed in a novel environment, the G2019S mice exhibit reduced exploratory behaviors, which may be indicative of fear or anxiety."
28582919	Parkinson’s disease (PD) is a very common neurodegenerative disorder with no proven neuroprotective or neurorestorative therapies. Recent advances in identifying genetic causes of PD have provided new opportunities for discovery of therapeutic targets and agents to potentially prevent the degenerative process of PD. Patients with LRRK2 mutations are clinically and neurochemically indistinguishable from idiopathic PD1. Disease segregating mutations in LRRK2 lead to neurotoxicity in vitro 2–4 and loss of dopamine neurons in PD patients 5. LRRK2 toxicity in vitro is linked to kinase activity and GTP binding, since mutations in LRRK2 that interfere with kinase activity and GTP binding, inhibit toxicity. Whether LRRK2 toxicity requires kinase activity in vivo and whether pharmacologic inhibition could protect against LRRK2 toxicity is not known.To identify LRRK2 inhibitors, LRRK2 autophosphorylation (Fig. 1) and LRRK2-mediated phosphorylation of myelin basic protein (MBP) (Supplementary Fig. 1) were monitored in the presence or absence of 84 Biomol kinase and phosphatase inhibitors at 16 μM (see Supplementary Methods and Supplementary Table 1). Indolinone compounds including staurosporine (compound 6), GF 109203X (compound 31), Ro 31- 8220 (compound 33), 5-iodotubercidin (compound 49), GW5074 (compound 56), and indirubin-3′-monooxime (compound 70) and anthracene compounds, SP 600125 (compound 68), damnacanthal (compound 22) substantially inhibit LRRK2 autophosphorylation (Fig. 1a, b) or LRRK2-mediated phosphorylation of MBP (Supplementary Fig. 1a, b). None of the inhibitors significantly enhanced LRRK2 kinase activity.The IC50’s of the 8 inhibitors were determined against autophosphorylation and MBP phosphorylation by wild type (WT) and G2019S LRRK2 (Fig. 1c, d, Supplementary Fig. 1 c, d and Supplementary Table 2). All the inhibitors except indirubin-3′-monooxime have relatively similar potency against WT and G2019S LRRK2 autophosphoryation activity (Fig. 1c, d and Supplementary Table 2). Indirubin-3′-monooxime more potently inhibits LRRK2 G2019S autophosphorylation. Staurosporine, damnacanthal, SP 600125, 5-iodotubercidin equivalently inhibit both WT and LRRK2 G2019S MBP phosphorylation (Supplementary Fig. 1 c, d and Supplementary Table 2). Both PKC inhibitors, Ro 31-8220 and GF109203X more potently inhibit both WT and G2019S LRRK2 MBP phosphorylation. GW5074 is less potent in inhibiting both WT and G2019S LRRK2 MBP phosphorylation. All 8 inhibitors have a similar inhibitory profile against LRRK1 autophosphorylation and MBP phosphorylation (Supplementary Fig. 2a d).Since LRRK2 and LRRK1 are related to the MAP kinase kinase kinase, Raf 6 and GW5074 inhibits Raf kinase 7, LRRK2 and LRRK1 autophosphorylation and MBP phosphorylation were monitored in the presence or absence of additional Raf kinase inhibitors, ZM336372, Sorafenib and Raf inhibitor IV (Fig. 1e). GW5074 more potently inhibits LRRK2 G2019S autophosphorylation and MBP phosphorylation than LRRK1 autophosphorylation and MBP phosphorylation (Fig. 1f, g and Supplementary Fig. 1e, f, 2e and Supplementary Table 3). ZM336372 has minimal to no effect on LRRK1 autophophorylation and MBP phosphorylation and no effect on WT or G2019S LRRK2 autophosphorylation or MBP phosphorylation. Both Sorafenib and Raf inhibitor IV inhibit LRRK2 autophosphorylation and MBP phosphorylation MBP with less potency than GW5074, but they have minimal to no effect on LRRK1 autophosphorylation or MBP phosphorylation (Fig. 1e, f, g and Supplementary Fig. 1e, f, 2e and Supplementary Table 3). These results taken together indicate that GW5074 inhibits both LRRK2 and LRRK1 kinase activities, whereas Sorafenib and Raf inhibitor IV are relatively selective for LRRK2 kinase activity and ZM336372 has minimal to no effect on both LRRK2 and LRRK1 kinase activities.Indirubin-3′-monooxime and the related analog, indirubin were also compared against LRRK1 WT, LRRK2 WT and LRRK2 G2019S autophosphorylation or MBP phosphorylation. Indirubin-3′-monooxime inhibits LRRK1 WT, LRRK2 WT and LRRK2 G2019S autophosphorylation and MBP phosphorylation, whereas indirubin has no effect on LRRK1 WT, LRRK2 WT and LRRK2 G2019S autophosphorylation or MBP phosphorylation (Supplementary Table 3). GW5074 and indirubin-3′-monooxime also inhibit LRRK2-mediated eukaryotic initiation factor 4E (eIF4E)-binding protein (4E-BP1), a putative physiologic LRRK2 substrate8, whereas ZM336372 and indirubin do not inhibit LRRK2 phosphorylation of 4E-BP1 (Fig. 1h, i).Both LRRK2 WT and LRRK2 G2019S overexpression leads to primary cortical neuron injury as assessed by neurite shortening (Fig. 2a, b and Supplementary Fig. 3) and LRRK2 G2019S overexpression leads to cell death as assessed by DNA fragmentation (TdT-mediated X-dUTP nick end labeling (TUNEL) assay) (Supplementary Methods) (Fig. 2c, d), whereas a kinase dead versions of LRRK2 WT (D1994A) and LRRK2 G2019S (G2019S, D1994) are devoid of toxicity as previously described 3,4,9 (Fig. 2a, d and Supplementary Fig. 3). Treatment of the cortical cultures with 0.5 μM GW5074 and 0.5 μM indirubin-3′-monooxime, which inhibit both LRRK2 and LRRK1, attenuate LRRK2 G2019S cell injury and cell death (Fig. 2b, d). The Raf kinase inhibitor, Sorafenib (0.5 μM), which is relatively selective for LRRK2 (see Supplementary Table 3), also completely protects against LRRK2 G2019S toxicity (Fig. 2b, d and Supplementary Fig. 3). The Raf kinase inhibitor, ZM336372 (0.5 μM), which does not inhibit either LRRK2 or LRRK1 kinase activity fails to inhibit LRRK2 G2019S toxicity (Fig. 2b, d and Supplementary Fig. 3). The cyclin-dependent kinase and GSK-3β inhibitor, indirubin, which does not inhibit either LRRK2 or LRRK1 kinase activity fails to inhibit LRRK2 G2019S toxicity (Fig. 2b, d and Supplementary Fig. 3). These results taken together indicate that the protection afforded by the Raf inhibitors (GW5074 and Sorafenib) and the cyclin-dependent kinase and GSK-3β inhibitor, indirubin-3′-monooxime, are due to inhibition of LRRK2 kinase activity and not inhibition of Raf, cyclin-dependent or GSK-3β kinase activity, respectively.To determine the efficacy of the LRRK2 kinase inhibitors in vivo, a herpes simplex virus (HSV) amplicon-based mouse model of LRRK2 DA neurotoxicity was developed (Supplementary Methods) (Fig. 2e, h). GFP is extensively co-expressed with TH and in ~75 % of substantia nigra compacta neurons after an intrastriatal HSVPrPUC/CMVeGFP injection (Supplementary Fig. 4). Immunoblot analysis confirms that WT, G2019S and G2019S, D1994A LRRK2 are overexpressed at equivalent levels (Fig. 2e). HSV amplicon-mediated delivery of LRRK2 G2019S induces significant loss of TH-positive neurons 3 weeks after stereotaxic injection into the ipsilateral striatum of mice compared to LRRK2 WT and eGFP control viruses (Fig. 2f, g). HSV amplicon-mediated delivery of LRRK2 G2019S, D1994A causes no neuronal loss similar to LRRK2 WT and GFP control viruses (Fig. 2f, g). Since GW5074 and indirubin-3′-monooxime and indirubin are known to cross the blood brain barrier 7,10,11, they were chosen to test whether inhibition of LRRK2 kinase activity is protective in vivo. Twice daily injections of the LRRK2 kinase inhibitors, GW5074 and indirubin-3′-monooxime, (2.5 mg/kg, i.p.) attenuate the loss of TH-positive neurons induced by HSV-LRRK2 G2019S/CMVeGFP compared to DMSO and indirubin injected controls (Fig. 2f, h). The density of TH-positive fibers is also reduced in HSV-LRRK2 G2019S compared to HSV-eGFP control and HSV-LRRK2 WT and the reduction in the density of TH-positive fibers is rescued by GW5074 (Supplementary Fig. 5). Transduction of eGFP and LRRK2 WT do not show any signs of inflammation as determined by isolectin B4 (ILB4-positive cells), but LRRK2 G2019S induces a significant increase of ILB4-positive cells in the striatum and SNc, which is also prevented by administration of GW5074 (Supplementary Fig. 6).The major finding of this paper is the identification of kinase inhibitors that inhibit LRRK2 kinase activity and protect against LRRK2 toxicity both in vitro and in vivo. Other kinase inhibitors have recently been reported to inhibit LRRK2 kinase activity with similar potency to those described here 12–15. Since an authentic substrate of LRRK2 has yet to be identified, there should be a note of caution regarding the physiological relevance of the screens used in this and related studies based on autophosphorylation and artificial substrates. These results hold particular promise for further studies focused on developing selective and potent inhibitors of LRRK2 kinase activity. Moreover, they demonstrate that pharmacologic inhibition of LRRK2 kinase activity is a potentially promising therapeutic modality for the treatment of neurodegeneration in PD."
28582920	To explore whether we can recapitulate impaired neuritic outgrowth and branching in a LRRK2 over-expression model we prepared primary cultures from BAC LRRK2 transgenic animals and non-transgenic littermate controls. Human BAC LRRK2 transgenic animals express the transgene under the endogenous promoter, to mimic the temporal as well as regional expression patterns of the endogenous gene. Based on the expression pattern of full length hWT, GS and YC Lrrk2 proteins in various brain regions (Figure 1a) we decided to evaluate neuritic outgrowth in hippocampal cultures as the area of highest transgene expression. In the absence of reliable antibodies for immunocytochemistry, Western Blot analysis was applied to confirm Lrrk2 transgene expression in P2 primary cultures (Figure 1b). An initial time course experiment determined day 8 as optimal for harvesting (Suppl. Figure 2) as dendritic protein MAP2 expression was robust and uniform, serving as an ideal marker for neuritic process and branch quantification. In contrast, axonal marker proteins such as tau revealed morphological variability over the first days in culture and were difficult to quantify at later time points. To evaluate dendritic arborization, primary cultures of the various transgenic lines were analyzed for mean process length and the number of branches. Compared to non-transgenic littermate controls, primary neurons from both mutant lines (GS and YC) presented with significantly reduced neuritic outgrowth and branching (Figure 2a) while the number of processes per cell remained comparable (Suppl. Figure 3). We observed a similar outgrowth deficit in cells expressing YC or GS mutations, in contrast to previous reports based on viral transduction [11]. While over-expression of mutant Lrrk2 protein induced a significant deficit in neuritic outgrowth and branching, over-expression of Lrrk2 wild-type had no effect on these parameters (Figure 2b). Length, branching and the number of processes per cell were comparable between hippocampal neurons from hWT animals and littermate controls (NT) (Suppl. Figure 3).To test the hypothesis that enhanced Lrrk2 kinase activity is responsible for the deficits in neuronal process morphology, cells over-expressing mutant Lrrk2 proteins (GS and YC) were treated with 200pM staurosporine (see material and methods sections for more details). This indolocarbazole derivate was recently confirmed as a Lrrk2 kinase inhibitor in-vitro, although its actions are promiscuous and may affect many cellular kinases [13,14]. Partial rescue of the neuritic outgrowth deficit was equivalent in both GS and YC cultures. The same concentration had no effect on non-transgenic littermate controls (Figure 2c).A separate set of experiments was performed in LRRK2 KO models to investigate whether regulation of neuritic outgrowth and morphology is an inherent function of Lrrk2 (Suppl. Figure 1b,c). We have assessed homozygous KO, heterozygous KO and non-transgenic control littermates to evaluate the effect of zero, one and two endogenous Lrrk2 alleles. Hippocampal and midbrain primary cultures were included to compare results between regions of high (hippocampus) and low endogenous Lrrk2 expression (midbrain). TH-positive midbrain neurons were chosen because they are especially vulnerable to pathology and neuronal loss in PD.We observed a comparable increase in mean process length and branching in both hippocampal and midbrain primary neurons derived from animals completely lacking endogenous LRRK2 (homozygous KO) in contrast to non-transgenic controls. Heterozygous KO animals, retaining one copy of the LRRK2 gene, revealed no change in either neuritic outgrowth or branching (Figure 3a and b).As staurosporine is generally regarded as a relatively unspecific kinase inhibitor [14], we aimed to confirm that the partial rescue observed in BAC mutant LRRK2 cultures is due to Lrrk2 kinase inhibition. Hippocampal homozygous KO cultures were treated with 200pm staurosporine, as previously described. No significant difference in neuritic outgrowth was observed between treated and untreated cells (Figure 3c).While all previous studies exploring the impact of mutant Lrrk2 on neuritic outgrowth [9-11] have focused on over-expression models, it remains unknown whether a comparable phenotype is reproducible in a system where mutant Lrrk2 is expressed at physiological levels and with the correct regional distribution. To evaluate whether Lrrk2 mutations expressed at endogenous levels induce a deficit in neuritic outgrowth and branching, primary hippocampal and midbrain cultures from homozygous G2019S knock-in (KI) animals (expressing mutant Lrrk2 endogenously) and littermate controls were generated. Endogenous LRRK2 mRNA is expressed in rodent brain during development and adulthood, beginning as early as embryonic day 15.5 [15,16]. Evaluation of mean process length (Figure 4), branching and the number of processes (data not shown) in either hippocampal or TH-positive midbrain neurons revealed no significant changes. Hence, endogenous expression of mutant Lrrk2 protein does not compromise neuritic outgrowth."
28582921	To screen for Lrrk2 PPIs we applied the QUICK approach (22) using NIH3T3 cells, resulting in a list of putative Lrrk2 complex components. A schematic overview of the experimental workflow followed in our study is presented in Fig. 1: a subset of the identified proteins was verified for its interaction with Lrrk2 by Western blot analysis following co-IP. Database-curated interaction data and interactions indicated by the experimental results were used to generate an Lrrk2 PPI network on the basis of the identified Lrrk2 complex partners. The result links Lrrk2 function to the actin-based cytoskeleton. Physiological relevance of the hypothesis was verified by both F-actin cosedimentation assays, determining the ability of Lrrk2 to bind F-actin and to modulate its assembly in vitro, and cellular assays, analyzing the morphology of NIH3T3 cells and DA neurons within primary VM cultures upon lentiviral-mediated knockdown of Lrrk2.Lrrk2 Interacts with Components of the Actin CytoskeletonTo identify Lrrk2 interacting proteins we conducted the QUICK approach (22), which combines SILAC, RNAi-induced knockdown, co-IP and quantitative MS to screen for endogenous PPIs.A prerequisite for the QUICK assay is the efficient depletion of the protein of interest within an appropriate cell type. We showed in a previous study that the expression of the Lrrk2-specific second generation shRNAmir construct miB3 in NIH3T3 cells results in an efficient Lrrk2 protein decline without induction of an immune response (24). Thus, corresponding viral supernatants were obtained and NIH3T3 cells were transduced with LVmiB3 1 day after plating. For the metabolic labeling with SILAC, wt and LVmiB3-transduced NIH3T3 cells were grown in “heavy” or “light medium” for at least five passages. Lrrk2 knockdown efficiency was monitored by Western blot analysis using the Lrrk2-specific antibody clone 1E11 (data not shown). To test whether the knockdown of Lrrk2 itself would lead to global changes in the proteome of NIH3T3 cells, whole cell lysates were prefractionated by SDS-PAGE, proteins were subjected to tryptic in-gel cleavage and the resulting peptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS (Supplemental Table 1). SlLAC quantification did not reveal considerable alterations in the proteome after shRNA expression. Applying the QUICK approach, proteins were immunoprecipitated using a rat-monoclonal anti-Lrrk2 antibody and peptides from the pooled eluates were subjected to LC-MS/MS. Lrrk2 was significantly enriched 3.57-fold in the wt compared with the knockdown condition (p ≤ 0.05, Table I). In addition, we identified 36 proteins with significantly increased abundance ratios (p ≤ 0.05, Table I), which we considered as potential Lrrk2 interaction partners. Moreover, we found 355 proteins being equally abundant in both conditions and therefore considered to be nonspecific contaminants (Supplemental Table 2). By literature-based curation, the potential interactors were categorized according to their molecular function, with the majority of the identified proteins clustered into four groups and merely six of them possessing miscellaneous functions (group 5). Group 1 represents proteins belonging to the actin family, the second group includes actin-regulatory proteins that steer the formation of actin filaments and their organization in structural higher-order networks. Additionally, we identified proteins belonging to the myosin superfamily (group 3) and modulators of these actin-dependent motor proteins that are listed in group 4. Moreover, a KEGG pathway enrichment analysis was performed using Pathway Palette to obtain an unbiased indication of overrepresented cellular process categories in the set of Lrrk2 complex components. The analysis yielded the highest enrichment for proteins annotated to the “regulation of actin cytoskeleton” pathway (KEGG pathway entry #hsa04810), with the by far strongest significance of p < 10−10.35 (Supplemental Fig. 1). In addition, the proteins could be mapped to several other, not necessarily independent pathways whose significance did however not exceed 10−3.6 (“leukocyte transendothelial migration”).A selection of the identified Lrrk2 protein complex components was confirmed to interact with Lrrk2 by independent co-IP followed by Western blotting (Fig. 2), utilizing cell extracts from wt and LVmiB3-transduced NIH3T3 cells. The analysis with anti-myosin Id, anti-Arp3 and anti-tropomyosin revealed specific signals for wt cells compared with those of shRNA expressing NIH3T3, displaying no or weak bands, and thus confirming the results of the QUICK assay.Interactions between the identified Lrrk2 complex partners were parsed and visualized using Pathway Palette in an evaluated and prioritized manner, applying interaction data stored in the HPRD and BioGRID database. Within the group of 37 specific interactors (nodes), the analysis identified 36 previously reported interactions (edges) between 20 individual nodes (Fig. 3A). To evaluate the physical cohesiveness of the inferred interaction network we applied PIE analysis. Fig. 3B shows the frequency distribution of edge numbers within the simulated protein sets (n = 1,000,000 simulated networks, set size 37). The analysis yielded a PIE score of 1.78 and a p value < 10−6 and thus reveals significant physical cohesiveness for the proteins identified within the QUICK assay, meaning that they interact with one another at a significantly higher frequency than a random set of proteins with the same node degree distribution. According to database searches for PPIs, interactions of proteins with Lrrk2 could not be automatically covered in the network. However, on the basis of the experimental results within both the QUICK assay and co-IP experiments, these associations were manually added, resulting in a Lrrk2 interaction network (Fig. 3A) that illustrates the close relationship between the identified proteins. To further analyze the connectivity between the Lrrk2 complex components, the network was expanded by linking pairs of proteins through interconnecting proteins using interaction data from the HPRD and BioGRID database, enabling the mapping of 10 additional proteins from the QUICK set into the network (Supplemental Fig. 2). Fidelity of the network was assessed through manual evaluation of all extensions in a literature-based fashion, with functional information extracted from peer-reviewed publications (Supplemental Table 3). The analysis revealed that the interconnecting neighbors predominantly comprise proteins associated with the actin cytoskeleton and/or affecting its modulation as well as myosins and their regulators. Thus, the extended network strengthens an inherent correlation among the identified Lrrk2 interacting proteins.Lrrk2 Binds F-actin and Affects its Polymerization In VitroThe finding that Lrrk2 interacted with actin isoforms and other cytoskeletal proteins suggested a possible association between Lrrk2 and F-actin. Therefore, we assessed F-actin binding of Lrrk2 in vitro in a cosedimentation assay using recombinant SF-TAP tagged Lrrk2 purified from HEK293 cells. After incubating a constant amount of actin (3 μm) with different concentrations of Lrrk2 (150 nm and 300 nm) under constant buffer conditions, actin was sedimented by centrifugation at steady-state level of polymerization. The pellets and supernatants, containing polymerized and unpolymerized actin, respectively, were analyzed by SDS-PAGE, followed by Coomassie brilliant blue staining (Fig. 4A, upper panel). (Co)sedimentation of Lrrk2 was visualized by Western blotting using an anti-Flag antibody (Fig. 4A, lower panel). Based hereupon, the amount of both Lrrk2 and actin present in the supernatants or pellets was quantified (Fig. 4B and C). In the absence of actin, Lrrk2 was only present in the supernatant, indicating that Lrrk2 did not self-aggregate forming pellets (Fig. 4A, condition 5). Coomassie brilliant blue staining following SDS-PAGE of the purified protein revealed the purity of the affinity preparation (Fig. 4A, upper panel, condition 5) as demonstrated in a previous study (36). In the presence of actin, Lrrk2 localized to the pellet fractions, visualized by Western blotting (Fig. 4A, lower panel, conditions 3 and 4; Fig. 4B). With increasing concentrations of Lrrk2 incubated with actin, we observed a concentration-dependent enhanced recovery of Lrrk2 with F-actin in the pellet fraction (Fig. 4B). Depending on the protein batch, the amount of Lrrk2 in the pellet increased between 1.3- and 2.3-fold using an added concentration of 300 nm versus 150 nm Lrrk2. Lrrk2 led furthermore to a significant increase in actin present in the supernatants, as shown by the quantification of Coomassie stained gels (Fig. 4A and C). Whereas in the control samples the majority of actin sedimented (Fig. 4A, upper panel, conditions 1 and 2; Fig. 4C), the addition of substoichiometric amounts of Lrrk2 decreased the amount of polymerized actin (Fig. 4A, upper panel, conditions 3 and 4; Fig. 4C). As demonstrated in Fig. 4C, the shift in the G-/F-actin ratio toward the monomeric form (in the supernatant) is statistically significant in the presence of increasing Lrrk2 (p < 0.01 and 0.001 versus SB buffer control, n= 4, one-way ANOVA, Holm-Sidak post-hoc test). At a concentration of 300 nm, Lrrk2 induced a ~1:1 distribution of actin between supernatant (48.00 ± 2.54%) and pellet (52.00 ± 2.54%) (Fig. 4C).Overall, our results demonstrate an association of Lrrk2 to F-actin. Moreover, under the in vitro conditions used, the G-actin/F-actin balance at equilibrium is altered in favor of G-actin indicating that Lrrk2 affects actin polymerization.Effect of Lentiviral-Mediated Knockdown of Lrrk2 on NIH3T3 MorphologyThe actin cytoskeleton plays a fundamental role in eukaryotic cells and is a major determinant of cell morphology. The assembly and disassembly of filamentous actin structures provide a driving force for dynamic processes within the cell. Fibroblasts are commonly used to study the mechanisms of actin cytoskeleton reorganization (40, 41). Therefore, we used NIH3T3 cells to investigate whether Lrrk2 depletion affects the cellular morphology. Wt, LVTH- and LVmiB3-transduced NIH3T3 cells were plated on glass coverslips and serum-starved for 24 h. Upon silencing of Lrrk2 the cells displayed a change in morphology in terms of elongation and narrowing of the cell body, whereas the wt and LVTH-transduced controls had a typical fibroblast-like morphology (Fig. 5A). As a quantitative measure of cell shape, we determined the ratio of perimeter to area (P:A-ratio) (38) and calculated both the average P:A-ratio (Fig. 5B) and its frequency distribution (Fig. 5C) for the different conditions. Frequency distribution analysis confirmed the immunocytochemical observations. The P:A-ratio in all three conditions ranged from 0.05 μm−1 to greater than 0.40 μm−1 with the majority of cells falling in the range between 0.20 μm−1 and 0.35 μm−1 (Fig. 5C). However, the distribution of the P:A-ratio revealed a shift toward higher values in the Lrrk2 knockdown cultures (Fig. 5C), indicating that a significant proportion of the cells showed cell body elongation and narrowing. The proportions of cells in the ranges of 0.15–0.2 μm−1 and 0.2–0.25 μm−1 were significantly reduced in the shRNA-treated cultures (p < 0.001 versus wt, n = 4, two-way-ANOVA, Bonferroni post-hoc test; wt: 12.06 ± 1.0% and 27.07 ± 1.0%; LVTH: 12.00 ± 1.3% and 27.59 ± 0.9%; LVmiB3: 8.53 ± 0.8% and 23.28 ± 1.0%), whereas the percentage of cells with a ratio greater than 0.4 μm−1 was significantly increased (p < 0.001 versus wt, n = 4, two-way ANOVA; wt: 10.07 ± 0.7%, LVTH: 10.68 ± 1.1% and LVmiB3: 16.07 ± 1.5%). This resulted in an increase in the average P:A-ratio of NIH3T3 cells expressing the miB3 silencing construct from 0.286 ± 0.004 μm−1 and 0.286 ± 0.005 μm−1 for wt and LVTH-control cells, respectively, to 0.309 ± 0.005 μm−1 for LVmiB3 cells (p < 0.01 versus wt, n = 4, one-way ANOVA, Tukey's post-hoc test) (Fig. 5B). These results denote that NIH3T3 cells undergo marked alterations in cell morphology upon Lrrk2 knockdown.Lentiviral-Mediated Knockdown of Lrrk2 in Primary VM Cultures Results in a Significant Decrease in Dopaminergic Neurite LengthOn the basis of the pathological association between Lrrk2 and PD and the importance of the actin cytoskeleton in neuronal morphogenesis (42), we investigated the role of endogenous Lrrk2 in neuronal cells. Therefore, we applied the lentiviral-mediated knockdown of Lrrk2 by shRNA expression to primary VM cultures. In addition to miB3 we designed a second, independent shRNAmir construct on the basis of the naturally expressed microRNA-30 precursor, miB4.Primary VM cultures derived from E12.5 mouse embryos were transduced with lentiviral vectors encoding the Lrrk2 targeting shRNAs (LVmiB3 and LVmiB4) or the empty vector (LVTH) 1 day after plating and were analyzed at DIV9 or DIV14. Transduction of the VM cultures with LVmiB3 and LVmiB4 resulted in a significant decrease of Lrrk2 mRNA levels relative to wt cultures (p < 0.001, one-way ANOVA) (Fig. 6A) and led to a relative Lrrk2-expression ratio of 0.50 ± 0.03 (LVmiB3, n = 5) and 0.52 ± 0.03 (LVmiB4, n= 3) at DIV9 and 0.45 ± 0.04 (LVmiB3, n = 5) and 0.51 ± 0.01 (LVmiB4, n = 4) at DIV14 (Fig. 6A). The decline in Lrrk2 mRNA levels after expression of the two silencing constructs was accompanied by a corresponding reduction in Lrrk2 protein content (Fig. 6B). We showed in a previous study that the expression of miB3 in cortical cultures does not activate a shRNA-mediated interferon response (24). Likewise, we observed no meaningful induction of Oas1 expression in LVmiB3- and LVmiB4-transduced primary VM cultures (data not shown) hence excluding an immune response, providing accordance with published RNAi guidelines (43, 44).For the phenotypic analysis of shRNA expressing primary VM cultures, cells were fixed, dopaminergic neurons were visualized by TH-immunohistochemistry and examined by fluorescence microscopy. The transduction with lentiviral vectors encoding Lrrk2 targeting shRNAs or the empty vector alone resulted in a transduction efficiency of TH-ir neurons of about 90%, determined at both DIV9 and DIV14 (data not shown). First, we quantified the amount of TH-ir cells relative to nontransduced wt cultures. At DIV9 no significant alterations in the relative number of TH-ir neurons was observed (p > 0.05 versus wt, n = 4–5, one-way ANOVA; wt: 99.28 ± 1.20%, LVTH: 102.12 ± 3.64%; LVmiB3: 102.16 ± 3.22% and LVmiB4: 97.34 ± 8.37%) (Fig. 7A). As recently as at DIV14, transduction of the cultures with either LVmiB3 or LVmiB4 caused a significant decrease in relative cell counts to 78.38 ± 4.18% and 74.92 ± 5.40%, respectively (p < 0.01 versus wt, n = 3–5, one-way ANOVA) (Fig. 7A). The relative amount of TH-ir neurons in the LVTH control expressing cultures revealed a reduction to 89.46 ± 5.79%, which was not statistically significant (p > 0.05 versus wt, n = 4, one-way ANOVA).Similar to NIH3T3 cells, we analyzed whether the depletion of Lrrk2 had an effect on the morphology of DA neurons. Fig. 8 shows representative images and camera lucida drawings of untreated wt, LVTH control and Lrrk2 knockdown (LVmiB3 and LVmiB4) cultures at DIV9 and DIV14. Knockdown of Lrrk2 led to shortened neurites as early as at DIV9 (Fig. 8A and B), which was even more pronounced at DIV14 (Fig. 8C and D). Quantitative measurements of the neurite length at DIV9 confirmed the immunocytochemical observations and revealed that the transduction with LVmiB3 led to a significant shift in the neurite length distribution (p < 0.001 versus wt, χ2) to shorter neurites (Fig. 7C). Expression of the LVmiB4 construct led also to a shift toward lower value, although it was not significant (p > 0.05 versus wt, χ2). However, the population of neurites with a length of 40 μm or shorter increased significantly compared with wt cultures (p < 0.001, n = 4–5, two-way ANOVA; wt: 24.04 ± 0.71%, LVmiB4: 33.29 ± 1.01%). Furthermore, the relative amount of processes with a length between 40–80 μm and 80–120 μm decreased from 22.68 ± 0.91% and 22.39 ± 0.81% (wt) to 19.51 ± 1.24% and 19.55 ± 0.89% (LVmiB4) (p < 0.05 versus wt, n = 4–5, two-way ANOVA). The alterations in neurite length distributions were reflected in a significant decrease in the average length of neurite extensions of TH-ir neurons expressing shRNAs targeting Lrrk2 over wt controls (p < 0.001 versus wt, n = 4–5, one-way ANOVA) (Fig. 7B). The outgrowth declined from 90.60 ± 0.98 μm in wt cultures to 58.92 ± 0.58 μm in LVmiB3-transduced and 82.20 ± 1.89 μm in LVmiB4-transduced cultures. In the LVTH control no alterations in the frequency distribution and average neurite length (91.54 ± 1.34 μm) were observed. Neurons cultivated until DIV14 possessed on average significantly longer processes than at DIV9 (p < 0.001 DIV9 versus DIV14, n = 3–5, two-way ANOVA), regardless of whether they expressed shRNA constructs or not (Fig. 7B). However, the average neurite length of LVmiB3- or LVmiB4-transduced TH-ir neurons at DIV14 was still significantly decreased compared with the wt or LVTH condition (p < 0.001 versus wt, n = 3–5, one-way ANOVA; wt: 122.03 ± 1.71 μm, LVTH: 120.45 ± 2.81 μm, LVmiB3: 69.73 ± 1.03 μm, LVmiB4: 103.65 ± 2.35 μm) (Fig. 7B). The corresponding neurite length distributions displayed a shifting to lower values, which was significant for both Lrrk2 targeting shRNA constructs (p < 0.001 LVmiB3 versus wt, p < 0.01 LVmiB4 versus wt, χ2) (Fig. 7C). Thus, depletion of Lrrk2 in primary VM cultures resulted in an impaired outgrowth of developing DA neurites."
28582922	Human G2019S Lrrk2 is highly expressed in regions of adult neurogenesisRegional expression of transgenic LRRK2 mRNA was assessed with a human-specific Taqman probe and revealed that the highest transgene expression in adult G2019S mice occurred in the hippocampal formation (Fig. 1A). Finer anatomical mapping using in situ hybridization with a LRRK2 human-specific probe confirmed that high expression was found in the Cornu Ammonis fields and, importantly, in the DG (Fig. 1B). Consistent with mRNA results, immunoblotting with a Lrrk2 specific antibody, PA0362, revealed that Lrrk2 protein levels were robust in the hippocampus (Fig 1C), in agreement with the estimated 14-fold expression over endogenous levels previously reported for the hippocampus in this line (Melrose et al 2010). Expression of murine Lrrk2 in the SVZ was described in detail previously (Melrose et al 2007). While we are unable to determine the exact level of human transgenic over-expression in the SVZ by Western blotting, expression analysis in hemi-brains from transgenic mice previously revealed an overall 3-fold expression of transgenic Lrrk2 protein versus endogenous Lrrk2 (Melrose et al 2010). Immunofluorescence with the Lrrk2 antibody revealed robust Lrrk2 expression in chains of neuroblasts in both NT and G2019S mice (Fig. 2J–M).Proliferation is markedly reduced in G2019S transgenic miceAs Lrrk2 is highly expressed in the adult DG and SVZ, we sought to ascertain whether this expression has an impact on cell proliferation. We analyzed the effect of Lrrk2 G2019S overexpression on newly generated cells in the hippocampal DG and SVZ 24 hours after a single injection of BrdU (Fig. 2A). We compared proliferation in G2019S versus NT littermate controls. Unbiased stereological counting methods were applied to estimate the number of BrdU-labeled cells. A significant decrease in BrdU-positive cells was detected in G2019S mice compared to NTs, as evidenced by a ~54% (p<0.01) decrease in proliferation in the DG (Fig. 2B, C) and in the SVZ (~36% decrease, p<0.05, Fig. 2D–F). The rostral migratory stream (RMS) appeared thinner in the Lrrk2 G2019S mice, with less BrdU-positive cells within this structure (Fig. 2G–I).Survival of new neurons in the olfactory bulb is significantly decreased in G2019S transgenic miceTo investigate the survival of newly generated neurons, four-month-old G2019S mice and NT littermates received daily intraperitoneal injections of BrdU for five consecutive days and were sacrificed 30 days later (Fig. 3A). A significant decrease in numbers of newly generated neurons was present in the granule cell layer of the olfactory bulb (41% decrease compared to NT, p<0.0001, Fig. 3B–E) and the glomerular layer (73% decrease, p<0.0001, Fig. 3B, F–I). The ratio of neuronal (NeuN-positive) profiles among the BrdU-positive cells was not significantly altered; neurons represented the majority of newly generated cells, with 94% (NT) and 96% (G2019S) in the olfactory bulb granule cell layer and 81% (NT) and 74% (G2019S) in the glomerular layer. Moreover, the TH-positive neurons were significantly decreased in the glomerular layer of the olfactory bulb, where a 72% decrease of TH-positive cells was detected (Fig. 3J–M, p<0.0001). The ratio of dopaminergic differentiation was not significantly different between both groups [18% (NT) and 17% (G2019S) of all BrdU-positive cells].Survival of new neurons in the DG is significantly decreased in G2019S transgenic miceThe number of BrdU-positive cells was reduced significantly in the DG of G2019S mice (73% decrease, p=0.0002) compared to the NT group (Fig. 4B). Adult neurogenesis was further studied by determining the fate of BrdU-labeled cells. The total number of newly generated neurons (BrdU/NeuN) was significantly reduced in the G2019S group (77% decrease, p<0.001, Fig. 4C, D). The percentages of neuronal differentiation of BrdU-positive cells did not differ significantly between NT (69%) and G2019S mice (64%). DG volumes were unchanged between transgenics and controls (0.1 mm3 in both groups).Dendrite length and branching points in new neurons are reduced in G2019S miceTo further analyze the dendritic morphology of newly generated neurons in G2019S mice compared to NT controls, we delivered concentrated GFP retrovirus (1×8 transduction units/ml) into the DG of three-month-old G2019S transgenic and NT mice. Brains were harvested one month after the retroviral injection (Fig. 5A). At this time point, the dendrites of newborn granule cells in control animals showed a highly polarized morphology. Retrovirus-mediated gene transfer allows the study of the morphological details of neurite outgrowth in new neurons (Zhao et al 2006). They had an elaborate dendritic arbor with abundant spines extending into the molecular layer (Fig. 5B), and the axons had reached their target area, CA3 (van Praag et al 2002; Zhao et al 2006). However, in the G2019S mice, less dendritic arborization and shorter dendrite lengths were observed (Fig. 5B). We measured dendrite length and branching points and found a 60% decrease in dendrite length in the G2019S group (Fig. 5C, p<0.0001). In addition, the arborization was severely impaired in these animals, with a decrease of 66% in branching points (p<0.0001, Fig. 5D).Spine density and mushroom spines are decreased in G2019S miceMature granule neurons receive most of their synaptic inputs from the entorhinal cortex through dendritic spines. Therefore, the number and shape of the dendritic spines are indicative of the connectivity of these newly generated cells. We asked whether spine density and development were also affected in the G2019S transgenic mice. The time point analyzed reflects a stage of late spine development (Fig. 6a; van Praag et al 2002). A significant difference was found in the G2019S group, with a 64% decrease in spine density (p<0.001, Fig. 6B, C). Spines have been categorized into different types on the basis of their morphology, which also reflects their maturation stage: mushroom, thin, stubby, and filopodia. Mushroom spines are more abundant in mature neurons, whereas thin, stubby and filopodia are immature developing stages (Nimchinsky et al 2002, Sala 2002). Interestingly, the number of mushroom spines was decreased in G2019S mice, indicating that, at this time point, mature, developed spines are less frequent in G2019S mice (decrease of 53%, p<0.001, Fig. 6D).Running increases the generation of new neurons in Lrrk2 G2019S miceThe rate of neurogenesis in the mammalian brain is not constant but can be influenced by numerous factors, among them enhancement by voluntary physical activity (van Praag et al 1999b). Enhanced physical activity subsequent to the introduction of a running wheel doubles proliferation in the DG as compared to what is observed in mice housed in standard conditions (van Praag et al 1999b). Moreover, voluntary physical activity increases the relative survival of the newly generated cells as well as the percentage of neuronal differentiation (van Praag et al 1999a). DCX is a marker used to assess and quantify changes occurring in the rate of neurogenesis in the DG following enhanced physical activity (Couillard-Despres et al 2005). When comparing non-running NT and G2019S mice (Fig. 7A), the decrease in neurogenesis reported above for BrdU/NeuN cell numbers was also reflected in a decrease in numbers of DCX-expressing neuroblasts (decrease of 71% in G2019S, p<0.001, Fig. 7B, C). Compared to NT non-running mice, NT running mice showed a significant increase in numbers of DCX-positive cells as a result of the increased physical activity (34% increase, p<0.05). This effect is confirmed between different strains of mice (Kempermann et al 2006; van Praag et al 1999b). Interestingly, there is also a significant increase in numbers of DCX-positive cells in the running G2019S group, indicating that the decreased numbers of DCX-labeled cells in the DG of non-running Lrrk2 G2019S animals could be partially reversed by physical activity (nearly 3-fold increase compared to Lrrk2 G2019S non-running group) and not statistically different from NT non-runners. This finding suggests that increased physical activity is capable of partially reversing the decrease in neurogenesis induced by Lrrk2 G2019S overexpression."
28582924	PD-linked G2019S LRRK2 protein incorporates more phosphates than WT-LRRK2 before oligomerization driven inactivationLRRK2 may autophosphorylate in a sequential manner over time in a process potentially altered by pathogenic mutations. In order to characterize the prominence of LRRK2 autophosphorylation and ensure saturation of possible autophosphorylation activity, in vitro kinase assays were conducted with highly purified recombinant LRRK2 (Δ1–970) protein and incorporation quantitatively tracked over time (Figure 1A). Phosphate incorporation for both WT and G2019S mutant protein was measured by dissecting LRRK2 bands from SDS-PAGE gels and determining incorporation via liquid scintillation. Within one hour, WT-LRRK2 protein incorporates 0.19 phosphates per LRRK2 molecule compared to the G2019S LRRK2 variant which incorporates approximately 0.5 phosphates per LRRK2 molecule. Since more than a dozen autophosphorylation sites have been proposed (Table 1), these data suggest that the vast majority of LRRK2 protein cannot autophosphorylate and may reside in an inactive state, and the G2019S mutation either increases rates of incorporation before kinase shut-down, enhances the proportion of an active state conformation, or induces additional autophosphorylation sites not present in WT protein.Both mutant and WT-LRRK2 protein autophosphorylation saturates within one hour (Figure 1A and B) and is accompanied by a precipitous decrease in kinase activity. Figure 1C indicates that after 40 minutes of incubation in a kinase reaction buffer, the WT-LRRK2 fragment in solution possesses just ~30% of original activity relative to activity in the first 20 min, whereas WT-LRRK2 Δ1–970 protein retains significantly more activity over the same duration when bound to affinity agarose beads (solid surface). Significant differences in loss of activity were also observed for incubation of full-length protein purified from Flag BAC transgenic mouse tissue compared to full-length protein bound to affinity agarose beads (Figure 1C). Incubation of soluble WT-LRRK2 Δ1–970 for the same time interval without ATP resulted in similar diminishments in activity when ATP is later added, suggesting that kinase inactivation is independent of kinase activity.Because linkage of LRRK2 to a solid surface greatly protects from kinase activity shut-down, we hypothesized that LRRK2 oligomerizes in an ATP and kinase-independent manner at temperatures compatible with enzymatic activity. In kinase assay incubations greater than one hour, LRRK2 protein partially accumulates as insoluble protein that does not successfully resolve by denaturing SDS-PAGE (Figure 1D). While aggregation is not observed at time points early than one hour on SDS-PAGE gels, native-PAGE analysis reveals a precipitous decline in the quantity of the kinase-active LRRK2 dimer (Figure 1D). These data suggest that LRRK2 kinase inactivation is not related to autophosphorylation but may be associated with progressive LRRK2 oligomerization.The G2019S mutation does not alter autophosphorylation site specificity in the GTPase domainThe G2019S-LRRK2 protein may demonstrate higher levels of autophosphorylation due to additional sites of autophosphorylation caused by altered kinase specificity, or due to increased activity prior to enzyme inactivation, or some combination. In order to identify the specific residues of LRRK2 autophosphorylation, in vitro kinase assays were conducted with LRRK2 WT, G2019S and kinase dead D1994A (KD) variants and autophosphorylation was visualized by Pro-Q diamond staining prior to band dissection (Figure 2A). Notably, the D1994A LRRK2 protein has no detectable phosphorylation either in nascent protein (recombinant protein derived from baculovirus infected SF-9 cells) or post-kinase reaction. Nascent phosphorylation at any residue could not be detected in WT and G2019S LRRK2 derived from SF-9 cells when probed with phospho-threonine specific antibodies (Figure 2B).Autophosphorylation-saturated LRRK2 protein bands were digested with trypsin, or chymotrypsin, or LysC protease, and analyzed by mass spectrometry. In order to maximize the number of peptide-spectrum matches and detection of phosphorylation modifications, both Collision Induced Dissociation (CID) and Electron Transfer Dissociation (ETD) fragmentation techniques were implemented on two different platforms: an LTQ-FTICR and an LTQ-XL equipped with ETD. ETD methods are often superior for the identification of phosphorylation and large peptides because fragmentation is restricted to the peptide backbone; thus, the modification remains intact31. As opposed to previous mass spectrometry studies to identify LRRK2 autophosphorylation sites, steps to enrich or select for phosphorylated peptides were omitted to avoid biases in the types of peptides isolated (e.g., acidic peptides versus the omission of phosphorylated basic peptides).Representative high-confidence spectra map autophosphorylation exclusively within or nearby the GTPase domain, despite excellent and near-complete coverage across the kinase domain and other putative areas for autophosphorylation (Figure 2C–H). Table 1 highlights sites of autophosphorylation from this study and others, identified in multiple mass spectrometry studies that use different approaches and sources of recombinant protein. Autophosphorylation sites associated with multiple peptides derived from diverse sources of proteins and alternative mass spectrometry techniques with different proteolytic enzymes provide very strong evidence against artifactual assignment. Notably, most sites replicated in more than one study reside in or nearby the GTPase domain. Mass spectrometry analysis of both WT and G2019S LRRK2 using ETD and CID sources indicated that the same residues were phosphorylated suggesting that the preferred intra-protein motifs are likely the same between mutant and WT protein, consistent with other reports using different assay conditions 21.To determine the possible effect phosphorylation would have on the GTPase domain structure, we inserted phosphorylation modifications to the crystal structure of the GTPase domain. The p1343, p1368 and p1348 phosphoryl moieties are predicted to closely interact with the magnesium ion (Figure 3A). In this model, steric hindrance would be unlikely to reduce binding affinity of magnesium. Rather, stabilizing ionic interactions should form between bound magnesium and these phospho groups. The autophosphorylation at 1491 would likely interact with the purine ring of bound nucleotide, whereas phosphorylation at 1503 occurs in a flanking α-helix coil (Figure 3B). A previously undiscovered phosphorylated residue in the GTP-binding pocket, pT1357, was detected but localized to a position where the surrounding structure is only partially resolved (Figure 3C). Remarkably, all phosphorylation sites with the exception of 1503 and 1357 can be considered as occurring in amino acids that comprise the nucleotide binding pocket and interface of the GTPase domain (Figure 3D).LRRK2 autophosphorylation of residue T1503 is reversible and can be detected with phosphorylation specific antibodiesAntibodies directed to specific sites of autophosphorylation may provide insight into LRRK2 activity in vivo. Most of the autophosphorylation residues detected in this study reside in kinked primary peptide structures that comprise the GTP-binding pocket and make poor choices for synthetic peptide generation and antibody production. The threonine at position 1503 is well replicated as a genuine site of autophosphorylation (Table 1) and localizes to an ordered and exposed α-helix that flanks the pocket and serves as a better site to direct an antigenic response. Affinity purified peptide-derived polyclonal antibodies were specific to phosphorylated forms of peptide and did not significantly bind to non-phosphorylated peptide as determined by ELISA analysis (data not shown). Application of pT1503 antibody to LRRK2 protein derived from transfected HEK-293FT cells was unable to detect signal by western blot whether total lysate or immunoprecipitated protein was examined (data not shown). However, robust signal is detected after in vitro autophosphorylation in kinase active but not kinase dead LRRK2 protein (Figure 4A). Mutation of the 1503 site to either alanine or aspartic acid likewise ablates the ability of the antibody to bind (Figure 4B). Similar to the effects of pathogenic mutations that enhance overall autophosphorylation levels (Figure 1 and ​and5),5), these mutations also increase staining at pT1503 post-autophosphorylation reactions in vitro (Figure 4C).Treatment of recombinant WT LRRK2 protein with PPase1 removes a proportion of phosphorylation modification at T1503 (data not shown). Despite using a vast excess of 3-orders of magnitude more enzyme than should be necessary to dephosphorylate LRRK2 and inclusion of a LRRK2 kinase inhibitor at ten-times IC50 (SU11248, 500nM) concentrations post-kinase reaction, PPase1 is only able to remove ~50% of autophosphorylation incorporation (Figure 4D). To validate that the kinase inhibitor is preventing LRRK2 activity during phosphatase treatment, we also included this compound initially in the reaction and autophosphorylation was effectively prevented. In contrast, PPase1 treatment of LRRK2-phosphorylated MBP in the presence of the LRRK2 kinase inhibitor effectively removes the phosphorylation modification. Other robust phosphatases commonly used in vitro including lambda phosphatase and alkaline phosphatase were similarly ineffective despite vast excesses of enzyme in the reaction under favored buffer conditions (data not shown), suggesting that LRRK2 displays a very unusual property in inducing autophosphorylation that is not readily reversible to protein phosphatases; this is consistent with phosphorylation of a relatively inaccessible binding pocket of the GTPase domain. To determine whether phosphorylation of LRRK2 residue 1503 occurs in vivo, LRRK2 protein from BAC Flag-G2019S LRRK2 transgenic mouse brain, lung, and kidney tissue was immunoprecipitated from rapidly dissected tissues in the presence of phosphatase inhibitors, and protein treated with ATP and magnesium or directly eluted to evaluate the endogenous unstimulated state of LRRK2. LRRK2 protein was subjected to SDS-PAGE, probed for p1503, stripped and treated with λ-phosphatase and reprobed with the p1503 antibody, and finally stripped and reprobed with anti-Flag antibody. Phosphorylation at the 1503 residue using protein derived from transgenic mouse organs can be detected readily and at very high levels after treatment of the protein with ATP and magnesium (Figure 4E). However, all efforts to detect autophosphorylation in naive protein preparations failed to detect phosphorylation at residue 1503. Likewise, endogenous phosphorylation of LRRK2 at residue 1503 was not detected above background in human fibroblast cells that express high levels of LRRK2 (data not shown). We conclude that LRRK2 may only be active under specific conditions in vivo that have yet to be elucidated, or autophosphorylation of 1503 is not likely to occur in cells, or activate LRRK2 may not be associated with fractions that are soluble under conditions conducive to immunoprecipitation.Phosphorylation at 1503 alters kinase and GTP binding activityLRRK2 autophosphorylation in the GTPase domain may suggest a reciprocal regulation of the two enzymatic activities. The mutations K1347A and T1348N in the GTP-binding pocket of the GTPase domain have been studied in the past and ablate kinase activity, but may also induce deleterious effects on LRRK2 structure which may lead to the spurious conclusion that GTP-binding regulates LRRK2 kinase activity. Indeed, the T1348N LRRK2 protein significantly under-expresses compared to WT-protein (Figure 5E) and the K1347A is less stable than T1348N in our experience. In order to better define the relationship between GTPase and kinase activities, and the effects of autophosphorylation, we explored additional mutations in the GTPase domain and measured kinase activity. To gain further insight into the relationship of the pathogenic mutation R1441C and kinase activity, R1441C and the kinase domain G2019S mutation were combined into a single full-length LRRK2 construct. The combination induced a multiplicative increase in activity (~7-fold against a peptide substrate, Figure 5A, B), supporting a model of kinase activation for GTPase-linked pathogenic mutations.Apparent from PD-linked mutations in the GTPase domain, nearby autophosphorylation modifications may alter kinase activity; therefore, we determined whether mutations mimicking or preventing phosphorylation in the GTPase domain affected LRRK2 enzymatic function. We created LRRK2 protein deficient in phosphorylation at 1503 with a T1503A alteration, and found a ~40% reduction in kinase activity compared to WT LRRK2 protein (Figure 5C, D). The T1503A alteration also significantly reduced the proportion of LRRK2 bound to GTP (Figure 5E, F). Unexpectedly, the T1503D substitution likewise reduced GTP-binding in LRRK2 protein, but recovered kinase activity to WT levels. A plausible explanation is that T1503D has structural effects on the GTPase domain that partially mimics a GTP-bound state allowing for continued kinase activity as though bound to GTP but reducing actual GTP-binding. We created additional substitutions at other autophosphorylation residues such as T1343A and T1348A, but these alterations greatly decreased protein expression suggesting destabilization of the pocket and stability of LRRK2. It is possible that autophosphorylation may help structurally organize the GTPase domain into a configuration favorable for continued and full kinase activity although this could not be confirmed in all phosphomimetic mutations due to poor protein stability and expression, and the inability to induce these alterations in protein that has already folded.Phosphorylation of the in vitro LRRK2 substrate MBP demonstrates unaltered specificity in the G2019S mutation of LRRK2 and a lack of consensus targeting sequences in native proteinsA plausible explanation for the increase in LRRK2 kinase activity in the G2019S PD associated mutation occurring in the kinase domain is that substrate specificity is altered, even in the event autophosphorylation is the same between pathogenic and WT protein. To explore possible changes in substrate site preference, we examine the LRRK2 in vitro substrate, MBP, by mass spectrometry. LRRK2 phosphorylates MBP with high efficiency that dwarves signal generated by autophosphorylation (Figure 6A). LRRK2 phosphorylated the predominant MBP monomer in addition to SDS-resistant MBP oligomers as resolved by SDS-PAGE. To discover the sites of LRRK2 phosphorylation on MBP and provide insight into target site preference and activity of mutant LRRK2, dephosphorylated MBP protein (Upstate) was treated with kinase-active LRRK2 or kinase-dead LRRK2 prior to digestion and analysis by CID and ETD mass spectrometry (Figure 6). Six phosphorylated residues were detected with very high certainty as sites of LRRK2-phosphorylation (Figure 6C–H). No phosphorylated residues were detected in MBP treated with kinase-dead LRRK2.Unexpectedly, a preferred phosphorylation motif could not be identified from these sequences when ±6 residues are evaluated from the position of the phosphorylation in substrate MBP and LRRK2 autophosphorylation (Figure 6B). However, most of the phosphorylated peptides identified from both MBP and LRRK2 have very high iso-electric points similar to the previously identified peptide substrate LRRKtide 16,32. Of the twelve peptides sequences described here (Figure 2 and ​and6),6), only four fell below pI 8.5 (ProtParam), indicating LRRK2 may prefer to phosphorylate highly basic sequences with an unusual tolerance and flexibility for target site specificity."
28582925	Kidney and lung pathology in LRRK2 mutant miceTo determine how kinase function contributes to roles of LRRK2 in vivo, we generated mutant mice (Supplementary Material, Fig. S1) carrying either a kinase-inactivating point mutation D1994S (kinase-dead, KD, Supplementary Material, Fig. S2) or the kinase-enhancing G2019S pathogenic mutation (knock-in, KI) that genocopies the human G2019S PD-causing mutation. Both mutations occur in coding exon 41 of the murine LRRK2 gene. To distinguish LRRK2 kinase from potential scaffolding functions of LRRK2, we generated mice lacking LRRK2 completely (knock-out, KO).In wild-type (WT) mice, the LRRK2 protein is highly expressed in the kidney (see below and Fig. 5B). Remarkably, both KO and KD but not KI and WT mice developed dark kidneys (Fig. 1A–C), thus confirming an earlier report on KO mice (18) and extending this finding to KD but not KI mice even at an age of 26 months. Kidney weight significantly increased in adult homozygous KD males, but remained unchanged in heterozygous KD males and in 3-month-old homozygous KD females (Fig. 1A). Histological examination of KD mouse kidneys at ages between 1.5 and up to 8 months and from two genetic backgrounds (BALB/c and C57BL/6) all showed localized microvacuolization manifested as an accumulation of many small isometric vacuoles in epithelial cells of the proximal tubules in both cortex and outer medulla (Fig. 1A and data not shown). Starting at the age of 8 months, vacuolated epithelial cells showed in addition a multifocal accumulation of granular, yellow–brown autofluorescent pigment reminiscent of lipofuscin (Supplementary Material, Fig. S3A) and an indicator for cellular aging (19,20). Like KD mice, KO mice also showed a male gender-specific increase in kidney weight starting around 5 months of age that persisted life-long but showed no significant incremental increase with age (Fig. 1C and Supplementary Material, Fig. S3D). Darkening of KO kidneys, however, occurred independent of sex starting around the age of 5 months (Fig. 1C). It did not occur in heterozygous KO mice (data not shown). KO like KD kidneys started to show diffuse microvesicular vacuolation in proximal tubule epithelial cells of the cortex and outer medulla as early as 6 weeks after birth (Fig. 1C). With age, microvacuoles became larger and more-and-more tubules were affected. At age of 5 months, KO like KD kidneys showed tubular dilatation and increased intracellular deposition of lipofuscin. In 8-month-old mice, KO but not KI kidneys showed tubular degeneration and extracellular deposition of lipofuscin (Fig. 1C and Supplementary Material, Fig. S3B and C). Interestingly, these LRRK2-specific pathophysiological changes in KO kidneys did not prevent or accelerate grossly other mouse species-specific age-related kidney histopathological changes that are typically observed in WT (and also KI) mice, such as glomerulonephropathy and tubulointerstitial nephritis (data not shown). We also found no histopathological evidence of genotype-related cell loss in kidneys of KO mice (data not shown).To determine whether the LRRK2-specific changes impaired kidney function we performed urinalysis. Twenty-two-month-old KO females (Fig. 1D) and 18-month-old KO males (Supplementary Material, Fig. S3F) developed proteinuria which was not yet observed at age 5 months (Fig. 1D) or in 20-month-old KI males (Supplementary Material, Fig. S3F).Microvacuolation as a result of LRRK2 ablation was also seen in lung tissue (Fig. 1E) where LRRK2 is expressed (see below and Fig. 5B). Here, they were restricted to a subset of large epithelial cells, classified as type II pneumocytes, and located within the alveolar-septal walls. These cells stained positive for Mucin-1 (data not shown). Type II pneumocytes are proliferating epithelial cells that produce and secrete phospholipid surfactant (21,22). Like in the kidney, also in the lung the changes were apparent already at the age of 1.5 months (Fig. 1E). They did not affect lung weight (Supplementary Material, Fig. S3E). The morphology of the microvacuoles in lung cells was similar to those observed in kidney tubular cells. Neither KD nor KI mice showed similar changes in the lung (Supplementary Material, Fig. S4 and data not shown). Other organs in KO mice including the brain and spleen which both have high levels of LRRK2 in WT animals (Fig. 5B), and organs such as the heart and liver showed no LRRK2 genotype-related histopathology even in 26-month-old mice (data not shown). Altogether, these histopathological findings demonstrate that LRRK2 serves homeostatic roles in the kidney and lung and that, when perturbed, result in pronounced microvacuolation of select cell types. Whether these changes are cell autonomously linked to LRRK2 dysfunction and/or the result of compensatory mechanisms triggered because of LRRK2-dependent dysfunction elsewhere in these tissues cannot unequivocally be demonstrated at this point.Alterations in proximal tubule secondary lysosomes and lung type II pneumocyte lamellar bodiesTo further characterize the microvacuoles, we first performed immunohistochemistry for lysosome-associated membrane protein 1 (LAMP1), a marker of late endosomes and lysosomes. In 6-week-old KO kidneys, tubules showed increased LAMP1 staining. The LAMP1-positive structures were enlarged and redistributed from an otherwise apical localization in WT tubules to a perinuclear distribution in KO tubules (Fig. 2A). Similar results were obtained in KD kidneys of 9-month-old mice, analyzed with LAMP2 immunohistochemistry (data not shown).For a more detailed characterization, we performed electron microscopic (EM) analysis (Fig. 2B). Kidneys of 2-month-old KO mice revealed an increase in the number and size of secondary lysosomes in some but not all proximal tubules. At age 6 months, most of the KO kidney proximal tubules contained enlarged and increased numbers of secondary lysosomes with typical stacked, whorled membranes, lipid and fine granular electron dense homogenous material. The fraction of the whorled membranes was substantially increased in KO when compared with WT kidneys, indicating an accumulation of phospholipid membranes. Further, the number of lysosomes with lipid and fine granular electron dense material as well as the number and size of apical vacuoles (phagosomes which contained cellular debris) was increased. Other cellular organelles in proximal tubule epithelial cells, such as mitochondria and peroxisomes, did not show morphological alterations when compared with the WT. Distal tubules and glomeruli showed essentially no changes when compared with WT mice (data not shown).EM studies on lung tissue from 2- and 6-month-old KO mice revealed morphological alterations in type II pneumocytes (Fig. 2C). Lamellar bodies were increased in number and size showing little or no age-dependent differences. These lysosome-related organelles store and secrete pulmonary surfactant and their lamellae are composed mainly of phospholipids (23). Like in the kidney, no obvious changes were apparent in other organelles inside type II cells like mitochondria or other lung cell types (data not shown).These findings demonstrate that both LRRK2 KO and KD mutants cause specific changes in lysosomal homeostasis in kidney tubule epithelial cells, and the KO mutant also alters homeostasis of lamellar bodies in lung type II pneumocytes. Noteworthy, and in contrast to what has been reported (18), we found no evidence of α-synuclein accumulation in KO kidneys (Supplementary Material, Fig. S5).Blood pressure changes in LRRK2 mutant miceThe kidneys play a central role in salt handling and many genes that alter this process cause hypo- or hypertension (24–26). Therefore, we determined whether LRRK2 mutations and/or the KO and KD but not KI associated kidney abnormalities influenced blood pressure. Telemetric recordings revealed a moderate but significant increase in diastolic blood pressure in KO and KI but not in KD mice (Fig. 3). Notably, we observed no change in vascular responses of isolated thoraxial and abdominal aorta from KO and KI mice (data not shown). Heart rate (Fig. 3) and weight (data not shown) were not affected. Systolic blood pressure was not altered (Fig. 3). As the KD and KO but not the KI mutants showed similar histopathological findings in the kidney, whereas only KO and KI but not the KD mutants showed changes in blood pressure, the latter seem to occur independent of the histopathological alterations in the kidney. Furthermore, LRRK2 effects on diastolic blood pressure are likely dependent on LRRK2 protein expression but not on its kinase function.Kidney Akt/mTOR/4E-BP1 pathway changes in LRRK2 mutant miceLRRK2 has been implicated in autophagy (18,27–29), a process that, when perturbed, could account for an increase in the number of microvacuoles in the KO and KD kidney and lung (KO only). However, none of the mutant kidneys showed alterations in LC3I/II levels (Fig. 4C and Supplementary Material, Table S1). Nevertheless, we observed in immunohistochemical analysis an increase of p62 in KO kidneys (Supplementary Material, Fig. S6) as described before (18) which seemed to localize to the secondary lysosomes and thus again implying that lysosomal homeostasis is altered. We did notice changes in mTOR (mammalian target of rapamycin), a central regulator of autophagy (30) and TSC2 levels; reduced in KD but increased in KI and KO mutant kidneys (Fig. 4), but phosphorylation levels of S6(Ser235/236 and Ser240/244) were not changed suggesting no gross changes in the activation state of mTOR (Supplementary Material, Table S1). Akt levels were increased in KD and KO but unchanged in the KI kidney and the phosphorylation levels of the PDK1 site (Thr308) were unchanged (Supplementary Material, Table S1). The levels of 4E-BP1 phosphorylation were, however, increased in KO (Fig. 4C) and KD (Supplementary Material, Table S1) but not KI mice (Supplementary Material, Table S1) which suggest reduced suppression of protein synthesis by 4E-BP1. Note that phosphorylation of 4E-BP1 results in an electrophoretic mobility shift of the protein to higher molecular weight (31). Similar results were obtained in KO and KI kidneys with an anti-phospho-4E-BP1(Thr37/46) antibody (Supplementary Material, Table S1). Gene expression analysis revealed no changes in any of the mRNA levels for Akt, mTOR, S6K, S6 or 4E-BP1 (data not shown) and at the protein level, heterozygous KO mice did not show any alterations (Fig. 4C). Furthermore, these changes seemed kidney-specific and were not observed, for example, in spleen (data not shown). Interestingly, immunoblot analysis also revealed a truncated mTOR protein in the kidney (Supplementary Material, Fig. S7; as well as truncated forms of TSC2 and Akt; data not shown) which levels seemed inversely correlated with those of the full-length mTOR protein in KD and KO but not KI mice (Supplementary Material, Fig. S7). Unlike these changes in older kidneys, 6-week-old kidneys, which appeared grossly normal but already manifested microvacuoles, revealed no changes in the levels of mTOR, Akt or TSC2 (data not shown). Therefore, most of these changes are likely secondary and compensatory.LRRK2 kinase function is essential for LRRK2 protein stabilityFull-length LRRK2 protein levels were similar in organs, including the brain, kidney, lung and spleen (Fig. 5A and B). Different brain regions, like striatum, hippocampus, cortex and cerebellum, expressed similar amounts of the LRRK2 protein, while others (e.g. brainstem) had much lower levels (data not shown). In the kidney, a prominent truncated form of LRRK2 (t1) was detected which was absent in KO (Fig. 5B), reduced to ~50% in heterozygous KO (Fig. 5C), unchanged in KI mice (Fig. 5D) and present only in much smaller amounts in other organs (Fig. 5B). Notably, homogenization conditions (degree of blockade of phosphatases/proteases) determined the extent and pattern of proteolytic cleavage of LRRK2 (Supplementary Material, Fig. S8), thus highlighting the importance of well-controlled conditions in biochemical experiments regarding LRRK2. To eliminate or minimize artifacts during sample preparation, we inhibited proteases and phosphatases as described under ‘additional phosphatase and protease inhibitors’ in the Material and Methods section. t1 represents a truncated form of LRRK2 that includes the leucine-rich repeat (LRR) region and the kinase domain as shown by mass spectrometry analysis of pull-down material with LRRK2-inhibitor coated beads (data not shown). In KD mutants, the levels of full-length LRRK2 in the kidney (Fig. 5A and E) and brain (Supplementary Material, Fig. S9A) (less in the lung or spleen) were dramatically reduced, while t1 in kidney remained unchanged (Fig. 5E). The spleen contained nearly similar levels of full-length LRRK2 (Fig. 5A) and pull-down experiments using LRRK2-inhibitor coated beads on kidney or brain samples confirmed that active-site ligand binding was retained in the D1994S KD mutant (data not shown). This suggests that improper folding and/or conformational instability of the LRRK2-D1994S full-length protein is an unlikely explanation for its decreased levels in the kidney. The lack of higher levels of KD protein in the insoluble fraction of the homogenized kidney further suggests that this mutant does not have a greatly increased propensity to aggregate (Supplementary Material, Fig. S9B). This view is further supported by our finding that pharmacological inhibition of LRRK2 using a low molecular weight adenosine triphosphate (ATP)-competitive kinase inhibitor (Supplementary Material, Table S2) reduced the level of full-length LRRK2 in the kidney of both WT (Fig. 5F and Supplementary Material, Fig. S10A, a second independent study in WT animals) and, slightly less, also in KI mouse kidney (Supplementary Material, Fig. S10B).These findings demonstrate the existence of a truncated form of LRRK2 that is present mainly in the kidney. Further, they illustrate that LRRK2 kinase function is needed for the homeostasis of the full-length LRRK2 protein in the kidney.No overt neuropathology and normal locomotor responses to dopamine agonists/antagonists in KO and KI miceUnlike the histopathological changes in the kidney and lung, histo- and immunohistochemical evaluation of LRRK2 mutant brain tissue failed to reveal LRRK2-dependent qualitative or quantitative changes. We probed markers for DA neurons [tyrosine hydroxylase (TH), dopamine transporter (DAT)], striatal GABAergic projection neurons [dopamine- and cAMP-regulated neuronal phosphoprotein (DARPP-32)], neurofilament (SMI), α-synuclein (αSN), astrocytes [glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP)] and microglia [ionized calcium binding adaptor molecule 1 (Iba1)] and all showed distribution patterns and staining intensities similar to WT littermates (Supplementary Material, Fig. S11; data not shown). Striatal dopamine levels and its metabolites dihydroxyphenyl-acetic acid and homovanillic acid were also unchanged in KO and KI when compared with WT mice (data not shown). Also functional changes in the nigro-striatal system were not detected when probing locomotor responses of KO (Supplementary Material, Figs S12 and S13) and KI (Supplementary Material, Fig. S12) to dopamine D1 and D2 receptor agonists and antagonists (see figures for details). LRRK2 mutations therefore do not result in obvious structural or selected drug-evoked behavioral changes in the nigrostriatal pathway."
28582926	LRRK2 KO and G2019S models have opposite transcriptional responsesUsing Affymetrix microarrays, we assessed the genome-wide expression profiles in the striatum, cortex, kidney and muscle of the LRRK2 KO and G2019S animals. LRRK2 KOs had more pronounced transcriptional changes across all tissues than G2019S when compared with wild-type (WT) littermate controls. One-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) within each tissue identified 647, 587, 485 and 447 sequences differentially expressed (P < 0.01) for the cortex, kidney, muscle and striatum, respectively, of KO animals relative to WT controls (Fig. 2A). The kidney, which expresses high levels of LRRK2, and muscle, which is a potential clinically accessible tissue, were included in the analysis. Estimated false positive rates (FDRs) for these signatures were 30, 48, 72 and 82%, respectively. Animals overexpressing LRRK2 had smaller but significant differences in brain regions only (striatum and cortex) when compared with their non-transgenic littermates (Fig. 2B). One-way ANOVA within each tissue identified 557 and 390 sequences differentially expressed (P < 0.01) for the striatum and cortex, respectively, of G2019S animals relative to NTg controls. Estimated FDR for these signatures was above 50% for both.We hypothesized that if LRRK2 KO and G2019S had opposite effects on gene expression, we would observe larger and more significant transcriptional differences by directly comparing KO and G2019S animals than by comparison with the respective controls. To test this hypothesis, gene expression levels in KO and G2019S animals were first normalized to expression levels in their respective NTg littermate controls to remove any potential mouse strain differences. Then, gene expression levels in KO and G2019S animals were directly compared using ANOVA to reveal robust signatures in each tissue examined (Fig. 3). This analysis identified 2986 (FDR 11.7%), 2045 (FDR 17.5%), 1646 (FDR 22%) and 761 (FDR 48%) sequences differentially expressed (P < 0.01) in the cortex, striatum, kidney and muscle between LRRK2 KO and G2019S animals (Fig. 3A).In order to identify transcripts regulated similarly by genotype across tissue types, we performed two-way ANOVA using all samples controlling for tissue type and genotype. This analysis identified 1833 sequences differentially expressed (P < 0.001, FDR 1.9%) between LRRK2 KO and G2019S, which we refer to as the LRRK2 genotype signature, and these changes were generally observed in all four tissues (Fig. 3B). Moreover, we found 11 highly significant transcripts by two-way ANOVA (with factors being tissue type and genotype, P < 0.001) that were detected across all four tissues tested. Gh (growth hormone), Prl (prolactin) and Lrrk2 exhibited the highest average expression across all tissues in G2019S relative to KO animals (Table 1).Conversely, hypothetical (microbodies C-terminal targeting signal/phenylalanine-rich region containing protein), zinc finger protein 287 (Znf287), RIKEN cDNA 4930572J05 and neuronal growth regulator 1 (Ngr1, particularly in the striatum) genes exhibited the lowest average expression across all tissues in G2019S relative to KO animals.To identify what tissue(s) had the biggest changes in mRNA expression, we ran correlation analyses between cross-tissue (combined expression) and each of the tissue LRRK2 G2019S and LRRK2 KO sets. Out of four tissues studied, we found that the cortex and striatum mRNA expressions contributed most to detected changes by the Pearson correlation (r2 = 0.98 and 0.95, respectively).Validation of the transcriptional responses in LRRK2 KO and G2019S modelsTo validate these findings, we used TaqMan to assay 80 named genes that met the following criteria in the striatum: (i) more than 60% expression difference between LRRK2 G2019S and KO; (ii) more than 20% expression difference between the corresponding model (LRRK2 KO or G2019S) and control (WT or non-transgenic litter mates, NTg); (iii) dynamics of expression was opposite (up-down and down-up) in LRRK2 G2019S and LRRK2 KO (Fig. 4). It should be noted that LRRK2 did not meet this criteria, as the array probes do not detect the G2019S transgene.In the striatum, 22 of the genes were confirmed to be significantly (P < 0.05) different between LRRK2 G2019S versus KO by TaqMan with direction in agreement with the array data (Fig. 4). Forty-four of the other 58 assayed genes exhibited trends in differential expression between GS and KO consistent with the array data. Importantly, for all 22 significant genes, LRRK2 KO and LRRK2 G2019S had significant or trending opposite effects on expression relative to their respective WT controls. Nine of the 22 genes were confirmed to be increased in LRRK2 G2019S versus KO. Genes that were increased >10-fold in 2019S relative to KO include S100a8, S100a9, Gabra6, Pcp2 and Crtam, 5–10-fold are Cbln3 and Cdkn1a and <5-fold are Abcb11 and Spef2. Six of the nine increased transcripts (S100a8, S100a9, Gabra6, Crtam, Cbln3 and Cdkn1a) were also significantly different when compared with non-transgenic littermate controls (Fig. 4A). Thirteen of 22 transcripts were decreased in the striatum of LRRK2 G2019S versus KO mice. Four of these were increased within the 5–10-fold range (Cdh1, Prg4, Slc22a6  and Prdm6), while five were significant against non-transgenic controls. Cdkn1a (increased in G2019S) and Slc22a6(decreased in G2019S) were confirmed to be significant against both the matching genotype controls and after direct LRRK2 G2019S versus KO comparison in the striatum.We also assessed the expression of these genes in the cortex by TaqMan. Although this gene set was not selected based on microarray evidence for changes in the cortex, nine genes showed expression changes in the overall same direction as the striatum. Those genes that showed obvious similar direction of changes in both the striatum and cortex included S100a8, S100a9, Abcb1, Cdkn1a, Pcp2 and Mid1 (Fig. 4B). Interestingly, five genes in the cortex changed in a direction opposite to the striatum (Tnfrsf11b, 4Cytl1, Fmod, Prdm6  and Prg4). S100a8, S100a9  and Slc22a6 were found to be significantly altered in the cortex, when compared with NTg controls (LRRK2 G2019S), and Cdkn1a, when compared with WT (P < 0.05, LRRK2 KO).To help prioritize these genes for follow-up, we used IPA and DAVID to assess whether the human homologs were targets of existing drugs or biomarkers. Only Gabra6 was found to be targeted by existing drugs according to the Ingenuity database, and six of the 22 genes have been proposed as diagnostic/efficacy biomarkers according to IPA. For detailed annotations of the 22 genes, see Table 2.LRRK2 regulates ribosomal function and glycolysis pathwaysTo identify the biological pathways that may underlie the transcriptional responses to the loss or the gain of LRRK2 function, we ran gene set enrichment analyses using multiple public ontological databases (see Methods for details). It was strikingly evident that animals overexpressing LRRK2 had an overall up-regulation, while LRRK2 KOs an overall down-regulation in genes involved in the ribosomal function. The kidney (E-value 0.003), cortex (E-value 0.001) and striatum (E-value 0.026) showed highly significant enrichment for genes involved in ribosomal function/translation function when analyses were run using gene signatures (P < 0.01) from each tissue separately or from the cross-tissue genotype signature (P < 0.001; E-value 4.8E–10; Table 3).Interestingly, another highly significant pathway expressed higher in the striatum of G2019S versus KO was glycolysis (E-value 0.009, Table 3). Only two other pathways were borderline significant in this comparison, and both of these were enriched in the muscle signature: clathrin-mediated endocytosis (E-value 0.1; 11 overlapping genes) and cell adhesion_alpha 4 integrin (E-value 0.26; 6 overlapping genes), identified by Ingenuity and GeneGo, respectively (not shown).We selected 13 ribosomal genes identified by gene set enrichment analysis that were significantly modulated in the cross-tissue genotype signature (P < 0.001) for TaqMan validation based on the assay availability. The results of expression of these 13 ribosomal transcripts in each tissue tested can be seen in Figure 5.Confirming the array findings, the majority of ribosomal genes were expressed significantly lower in LRRK2 KO than in LRRK2 G2019S in the kidney, cortex and striatum. Only Rps2 was significantly higher in the LRRK2 KO kidney when compared with both G2019S and WT, while no change was observed in the striatum and somewhat down-regulation in the LRRK2 KO cortex. Rpl15 and Rpl27a were consistently significantly regulated (P < 0.05) compared with matching controls (WT and NTg) in all tissues tested.LRRK2 modulates the expression of membrane-bound organelle, protein metabolism and mitochondrial genesWe ran similar gene set enrichment analyses on the gene set that were down-regulated in LRRK2 G2019S mice compared with KO. We found that genes associated with membrane-bound organelles were highly enriched in both brain regions (cortex, E-value 8.39E–07, 680 transcripts; striatum, E-value 1.82E–124, 410 transcripts). In the cortex, biological sets comprising ubiquitination processes were also highly significantly down-regulated in LRRK2 G2019 animals compared with KO, while in the striatum ER, oxidative phosphorylation, RNA processing and mitochondrial function were down-regulated. The kidney had only one pathway of borderline significance (sensory perception of smell; E-value 0.2; 34 overlapping genes, not shown) and muscle had none (Table 4).Additionally, using public brain expression data, Ingenuity and Metabase sources from targeted geoscience initiative, we found that in the striatum 116 of 410 transcripts identified for membrane-bound organelle (~30%) were interconnected. Two of 116 genes—Ctcf (CCCTC-binding factor known to promote histone methylation) and Zfx (zinc-finger protein X linked)—had most connections with other genes and thus were overrepresented (Supplementary Material). Similar patterns (interconnectivity and overrepresentation) were observed in the mouse cortex for ‘membrane-bound organelle’ function (not shown)."
28582927	Lrrk2 knockdown attenuates LPS-induced inflammatory responses in microgliaAs a first step in examining the role of Lrrk2 in microglia, we developed stable murine Lrrk2 knockdown (Lrrk2-KD) microglia. For this, we infected BV-2 microglia with lentiviral particles encoding shRNAs targeting Lrrk2 or a non-targeting control shRNA. We chose two Lrrk2-KD clones and two control clones for these experiments. Lrrk2 mRNA and proteins levels were dramatically reduced in Lrrk2-KD microglia (Fig. 1A). We then analyzed the expression of the proinflammatory mediators TNF-α, IL-1β, and iNOS following LPS treatment. In Lrrk2-KD clones, TNF-α and IL-6 secretion was significantly decreased at 3 and 24 hours compared to untransfected parental (−) cells and control clones (Fig. 1B). iNOS protein expression and NO production (detected as NO-derived nitrite by 48 hours after activation) were also significantly reduced in Lrrk2-KD clones at 24 and 48 hours (Fig. 1C, 1D). Consistent with the results, a qRT-PCR analysis showed that LPS (100 ng/mL)-induced expression of IL-1β, IL-6, and iNOS mRNA was dramatically reduced in Lrrk2-KD clones at 3 and 9 hours (Fig. 1E). A significant decrease in TNF-α mRNA expression was only detected at 3 hours since its expression reduced to the basal level at 9 hours (Fig. 1E). We further examined whether Lrrk2 affects other TLR receptors that have potentials to induce inflammatory response in BV-2 microglia [29]. Using agonists for TLR2 (lipoteichoic acid, LTA, 10 µg/ml), TLR-7/8 (CL097, 500 ng/ml), and TLR-9 (ODN1668, 500 ng/ml), we found that Lrrk2-KD could regulate inflammatory responses mediated by these TLRs since nitric oxide production induced by these TLR agonists were significantly reduced in Lrrk2 KD clones (Fig. 1F–H). Similar results were obtained in Drosophila LRRK (dLRRK) loss-of-function mutant, LRRKP1 [30]: mRNA expression of antimicrobial proteins, attacin A and diptericin, was significantly reduced in LRRKP1 compared to wild type Drosophilaat 5-, or 30-days (Figure S1). Taken together, these results indicate that LRRK2 is a positive regulator of inflammation.Lrrk2 knockdown specifically attenuates LPS-induced activation of p38 MAPK, but not JNK or ERKMAPKs are critical signaling molecules in LPS-induced microglial inflammatory processes [31]. Therefore, we examined whether activation of MAPKs was impaired in Lrrk2-KD microglia by analyzing phosphorylation of p38, JNK, and ERK following LPS stimulation. Parental cells and control cells showed similar levels of phosphorylated MAPKs (Fig. 2A, 2B). Interestingly, the levels of phosphorylated p38 (p-p38) were specifically attenuated in Lrrk2-KD cells between 15 and 60 min after LPS treatment compared to that in parental and control cells while the levels of p-ERK and p-JNK were not different (Fig. 2A, 2B). The other Lrrk2-KD clone also showed attenuated p-p38 levels in response to LPS (data not shown). Next, we analyzed activation of MKK3/6, an upstream kinase of p38 MAPK. In response to LPS, phosphorylation levels of serine 189/207 of MKK3/6 (p-MKK3/6) increased from 15 to 60 min (Fig. 2C). However, p-MKK3/6 levels were not significantly different in parental, control, and Lrrk2-KD cells (Fig. 2D, 2E).Lrrk2 knockdown attenuates LPS-induced activation of NF-κB and increases the DNA-binding activity of the NF-κB p50 subunitThe transcription factor NF-κB is important in mediating the expression of inflammatory genes in microglia [32]–[34]. To assess the function of Lrrk2 in the process of inflammatory activation, we analyzed the transcriptional activity of NF-κB in Lrrk2-KD microglia by measuring the activity of a luciferase reporter expressed under the control of a promoter containing five repeats of an NF-κB-binding sequence. LPS (100 ng/mL) increased luciferase activity by 3–4 fold in parental (−) and control cells; in contrast, luciferase activity was increased only 1–2 folds in both of Lrrk2-KD clones (Fig. 3A).We next analyzed the molecular mechanism responsible for Lrrk2-stimulated NF-κB transcriptional activity. Interestingly, degradation of IκB protein, a prerequisite event for nuclear translocation of NF-κB, was not different in control and Lrrk2-KD cells; in cells of both clonal types, IκB protein was decreased at approximately 30 min, but rebounded 60 min after LPS activation (Fig. 3B). This result suggests that diminished NF-κB transcriptional activity in Lrrk2-KD cells is mediated by disruption of a molecular mechanism downstream of IκB degradation.A further investigation of the mechanism of Lrrk2 regulation of NF-κB activity using EMSA analyses unexpectedly showed that both lower (Fig. 4A, arrow) and upper (Fig. 4A, arrowhead) NF-κB-DNA complexes, identified in supershift assays as p50/p50 homodimers and mainly p50/p65 heterodimers, respectively (Fig. 4B), were somewhat more strongly detected in Lrrk2-KD cells than in control cells between 15 and 60 min after LPS stimulation. It has been reported that, unlike p50/p65 heterodimers, p50/p50 homodimers function to inhibit transcription [35]. Thus, we analyzed nuclear proteins that bound to the NF-κB binding DNA consensus sequence. For this, we incubated nuclear extracts with a 5′-biotinylated DNA probe and then precipitated with streptavidin-agarose resin. Within 30 min, LPS induced the nuclear translocation of p50 and p65 NF-κB subunits to a comparable degree in both Lrrk2-KD and control cells (Fig. 4C, Nuclear extract). Importantly, however, more p50 bound to DNA in Lrrk2-KD cells; p65 binding was not different in these two types of cells (Fig. 4C, DNA-binding). These results suggest that NF-κB transcriptional activity is reduced in Lrrk2-KD cells because the affinity of the inhibitory p50 subunit for the NF-κB consensus sequence is higher in these cells than in controls.Effect of overexpression of LRRK2-WT and LRRK2 mutants on LPS-induced inflammatory responsesWe next examined the effect of overexpression of hLRRK2 on LPS-induced activation of MAPKs and NF-κB using HEK293T cells. These cells were used because of low transfection efficiency of BV-2 microglia. Because parental HEK293T cells do not respond to LPS treatment [36], we transiently transfected HEK293T cells with expression plasmids for the LPS receptor, TLR4, and proteins of the downstream signaling machinery, CD14 and MD2 [37], [38]. In these LPS-responsive TCM-HEK cells, LPS induced phosphorylation of p38 and JNK within 60 min (Fig. 5A). Thus, we analyzed the effect of LRRK2-WT and LRRK2 mutants on basal and LPS-induced p38 and JNK phosphorylation levels in TCM-HEK cells cotransfected with LRRK2-expression vectors or empty vector (mock). Overexpression of LRRK2-WT and all LRRK2 mutants, including kinase-active (G2019S), kinase-dead (D1994A), and WD-domain (G2385R) mutants, tended to increase basal levels of phosphorylated p38 compared to empty vector-transfected (mock) cells, although the extent of the increase varied depending on the specific LRRK2 variant. Basal levels of phosphorylated JNK were also increased by overexpression of LRRK2-WT and LRRK2-G2019S, but not by overexpression of LRRK2-D1994A or LRRK2-G2385R (Fig. 5B, 5C). LPS increased p38 and JNK phosphorylation in cells transfected with LRRK2-WT, LRRK2-G2019S, and in mock-transfected cells, but not in cells transfected with LRRK2-D1994A or LRRK2-G2385R (Fig. 5B, 5C). Notably, LPS-induced p38 phosphorylation was significantly increased in LRRK2-G2019S-expressing cells, and LPS-induced JNK phosphorylation was increased in LRRK2-WT and LRRK2-G2019S-expressing cells above the levels in mock cells (Fig. 5B, 5C). The kinase-active mutant G2019S, in particular, enhanced both basal and LPS-induced levels of phosphorylated (activated) p38 and JNK, whereas the effects of other LRRK2 mutants on p38 and JNK activation were variable. However, as in microglia, overexpression of LRRK2-WT, -G2019S, and -D1994A had no effects on p-MKK3/6 levels in TCM-HEK cells in the absence and presence of LPS (Fig. 5D).Next, we examined whether overexpression of LRRK2-WT or LRRK2 mutants modified NF-κB transcriptional activity. Expression of LRRK2-WT increased NF-κB transcriptional activity in HEK cells (left panel in Fig. 6A) as previously reported [16]. However, expression of TCM alone significantly enhanced NF-κB transcriptional activity in HEK cells (Fig. 6A), and co-expression of LRRK2-WT did not further increase NF-κB transcriptional activity (left panel in Fig. 6A). Expression of LRRK2 was confirmed with Western blot (right panel in Fig. 6A). Next, we evaluated the effect of overexpression of LRRK2-WT on LPS-induced NF-κB transcriptional activity in TCM-HEK cells: LRRK2-WT compared to empty vector enhanced LPS-induced NF-κB activity (Fig. 6B). This increase in NF-κB activity was LPS-dose dependent in the range of 0.01–100 ng/mL, with maximum activity obtained with 1 ng/mL LPS (Fig. 6B). We further analyzed the effect of other LRRK2 mutants on NF-κB activity. Interestingly, all LRRK2 mutants (R1441C, G2019S, G2385R, and D1994A) significantly increased NF-κB activity, indicating that the increase was independent of mutations in ROC, kinase, and WD domains (Fig. 6C). In addition, G2019S showed dose-response at 100 and 250 ng, but not at 750 ng (Fig. 6D). G2385R also similarly increased NF-κB activity at 100 ng and 500 ng (Fig. 6D). Thus, the effect of Lrrk2 on NF-κB activity may be saturated at quite low Lrrk2 levels.Next, we further analyzed the effect of LRRK2 overexpression on the formation of NF-κB-DNA complexes in TCM-HEK cells since the p50 binding to the NF-κB consensus sequence increased in response to LPS in Lrrk2-KD microglia (Figs. 4 and 6E–F). However, there was no significant difference in NF-κB-DNA complex formation in LRRK2-overexpressing and vector-transfected (mock) cells between 30 min and 2 h after LPS activation (Fig. 6E, arrowhead). Supershift assay with p50 and p65 antibodies showed that the NF-κB-DNA complex is p50/p65 heterodimers, and no p50/p50 homodimer was detected in TCM-HEK cells (Fig. 6F).Taken together, the results of this study suggest that LRRK2 regulates inflammation in settings as diverse as murine microglia and TCM-HEK cells. Furthermore, p38 and JNK MAPK, and NF-κB signaling pathways are possible targets of LRRK2."
28582928	Generation of transgenic mice expressing mutant (G2019S) orwild-typeLRRK2In the present study, we prepared a PD animal model by generating transgenic mice expressing HA-tagged disease-causing (G2019S) LRRK2. As a control, transgenic mice expressing HA-tagged wild-type LRRK2 were also generated. Previous studies by us and others showed that a high level of PDGF-β promoter-mediated neuronal transgene expression was observed in the cerebral cortex, striatum, and SN.22, 23, 24 Furthermore, hybrid CMV enhancer/PDGF-β promoter mediated a high level of transgene expression in SNpc dopaminergic neurons.25 Therefore, the expression of (G2019S) or wild-type LRRK2HA in the transgenic mouse was under transcriptional control of CMV enhancer/PDGF-β promoter. Southern blot analysis was performed to identify founder animals expressing transgene (CMV enhancer/PDGF-β promoter-(G2019S) LRRK2HA or CMV enhancer/PDGF-β promoter-LRRK2HA) and determine approximate copy number. Two CMV enhancer/PDGF-βpromoter-(G2019S) LRRK2HA founder mice with a high copy number (10 copies) of transgene were used to establish two stable lines of (G2019S) LRRK2 transgenic mice (lines 32 and 51). As a control, two lines of LRRK2 transgenic mice (lines 36 and 43) were also generated from two CMV enhancer/PDGF-β promoter-LRRK2HA founder mice with 10 copies of transgene.HA-tagged (G2019S) LRRK2 was expressed in various brain regions of (G2019S) LRRK2 mouse, including the cerebral cortex, cerebellum, SN, and striatum (Figure 1a). Similarly to (G2019S) LRRK2 mice, HA-tagged wild-type LRRK2 was found in several brain regions including the SN (Figure 1a) and striatum of LRRK2 transgenic mice. Protein level of wild-type LRRK2HA in the SN of LRRK2 mouse was similar to that of (G2019S) LRRK2HA in the SN of (G2019S) LRRK2 transgenic mouse (Figure 1a).Double immunofluorescence staining using anti-TH antiserum and anti-HA antibody was performed to visualize the expression of HA-tagged (G2019S) or wild-type LRRK2 in SNpc dopaminergic neurons. Consistent with a previous study reporting that CMV enhancer/PDGF-β promoter mediated transgene expression in SNpc dopaminergic cells,25 confocal microscopy showed that HA-tagged (G2019S) or wild-type LRRK2 was found in the cytoplasm of about 70% of SNpc TH-positive dopaminergic neurons in 10-month-old transgenic mice expressing (G2019S) or wild-type LRRK2 (Figure 1b; n=4 animals).(G2019S) LRRK2 transgenic mice exhibit progressive degeneration of SNpc dopaminergic neuronsImmunohistochemical TH staining was conducted to visualize degeneration of SNpc dopaminergic cells in 8- to 16-month-old (G2019S) LRRK2 transgenic mice. The number of SNpc TH-positive dopaminergic cells of 8- to 9-month-old (G2019S) LRRK2 mice (n=4 animals) was not significantly different from that of wild-type mice at the same age. Compared with 12-month-old wild-type mice, two lines of age-matched (G2019S) LRRK2 mice exhibited a significant reduction in the number of SNpc dopaminergic neurons (Figure 2a). Neuronal death of SNpc dopaminergic cells progressively deteriorated in 16-month-old (G2019S) LRRK2 transgenic mice (Figure 2a). In contrast, the number of SNpc dopaminergic neurons was not significantly altered in two lines of 12- or 16-month-old transgenic mice expressing wild-type LRRK2 (Figure 2a).In addition to a loss of SNpc dopaminergic neurons, another common pathological hallmark of PD is the formation of intracytoplasmic protein aggregates termed as Lewy bodies, composed of the synaptic vesicle-associated protein α-synuclein, ubiquitin, and other components, in the surviving SN neurons.26 Immunocytochemical staining using monoclonal FK2 antiserum, which recognizes ubiquitinated proteins, anti-α-synuclein antibody or anti-phospho-α-synucleinSer129 antiserum failed to observe Lewy bodies or Lewy neurites in the SN of 12- to 16-month-old (G2019S) LRRK2 transgenic mice (n=5 animals; data not shown).Tau pathology, caused by accumulation of hyperphosphorylated microtubule-associated protein tau with numerous Ser/Thr phosphorylation sites including Ser202 and Thr205, was found in PARK8 patients with (G2019S) LRRK2 mutation.13 Western blot analysis with AT8 monoclonal antibody, which recognizes a tau epitope phosphorylated at Ser202 and Thr205, was performed to visualize phospho-tauSer202/Thr205expression in the brain of wild-type, LRRK2, or (G2019S) LRRK2 mouse. Protein level of phospho-tauSer202/Thr205 was increased in the SN of 12-month-old (G2019S) LRRK2 transgenic mice (Figure 2b). In contrast, protein expression of phospho-tauSer202/Thr205 was not altered in the SN of transgenic mice expressing wild-type LRRK2 (Figure 2b). Protein level of phospho-tauSer202/Thr205 was not significantly altered in the cerebellum, cerebral cortex, and striatum of 12-month-old (G2019S) LRRK2 mice (n=5 animals; data not shown).Consistent with previous neuropathological studies of (G2019S) LRRK2 PD patients,12, 14, 15, 16 immunohistochemical staining of neuronal marker NeuN showed the absence of significant neuronal death in the cerebral cortex, hippocampus, and striatum (Figure 2c) of 12- or 16-month-old (G2019S) LRRK2 transgenic mice (n=5 animals).(G2019S) LRRK2-induced neuronal death of SNpc dopaminergic cells is expected to cause the degeneration of nigrostriatal dopaminergic terminals. Therefore, microSPECT imaging of 99mTc-TRODAT, a tracer of presynaptic dopamine transporter (DAT), was performed to visualize in-vivo DAT density in the striatum of mouse. Single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) imaging studies demonstrated that striatal 99mTc-TRODAT uptake was significantly decreased in 12-month-old (G2019S) LRRK2 transgenic mice as compared with age-matched wild-type mice (Figures 3A and B). Compared with 16-month-old control mice or transgenic mice expressing wild-type LRRK2, density of TH-immunoreactive staining was also decreased in the striatal sections of (G2019S) LRRK2 mice (Figures 3C and D).(G2019S) LRRK2 transgenic mice display progressive parkinsonism phenotypesSimilarly to hypokinesia exhibited by PD patients, 12-month-old (G2019S) LRRK2 transgenic mice were less active, which was indicated by a significant reduction in measured spontaneous ambulatory activity (Figure 4a). The severity of reduced locomotor activity progressively increased in (G2019S) LRRK2 mice at 16 months of age (Figure 4a). In contrast, 12- or 16-month-old LRRK2 transgenic mice did not display the symptom of hypoactivity (Figure 4a).The pole test was also conducted to investigate the motor performance of mouse. Similarly to bradykinesia displayed by PD patients, animal with a lesion of SNpc dopaminergic neurons takes a longer time to perform the pole test.27 Twelve- or sixteen-month-old (G2019S) LRRK2 transgenic mice exhibited an impaired motor performance and the phenomenon of bradykinesia, which was indicated by a significant increase in time required to perform the pole test (Figure 4b). The performance of LRRK2 transgenic mice in the pole test was similar to that of wild-type mice (Figure 4b).(G2019S) LRRK2 PD patients had a good response to ℒ-DOPA treatment.6 Therefore, we tested the possible beneficial effect of ℒ-DOPA on PD phenotype displayed by (G2019S) LRRK2 transgenic mice. Compared with saline-treated wild-type mice, 12-month-old (G2019S) LRRK2 mice injected with saline displayed a significant reduction in open-field locomotor activity measured by the distance traveled during the test period (Figure 4c). Similarly to PD patients with (G2019S) LRRK2 mutation, intraperitoneal administration of methyl ℒ-DOPA (2 mg/kg of body weight) reversed the hypoactivity exhibited by (G2019S) LRRK2 transgenic mice (Figure 4c). Thus, (G2019S) LRRK2 mice prepared by us recapitulated (G2019S) LRRK2 PD patient′s clinical characteristics, progressive motor deficit, and responsiveness to ℒ-DOPA.(G2019S) LRRK2 exhibits an augmented kinase activity of phosphorylating MAPK kinase 4 at Ser 257(G2019S) LRRK2 mutation resulted in an augmented in-vitro kinase activity.15, 16, 17 Thus, it is very likely that (G2019S) LRRK2 mutation causes overphosphorylation of downstream substrates, aberrant activation of neuronal death signal pathway and resulting in degeneration of SNpc dopaminergic neurons in (G2019S) LRRK2 transgenic mice.Recently, we performed quantitative phosphoproteomic analysis by quantifying differentially labeled phosphopeptides isolated from the SN of wild-type or (G2019S) LRRK2 mice and identified upregulated phosphoproteins, which are likely to be (G2019S) LRRK2 substrates, in the (G2019S) LRRK2 transgenic mice. Interestingly, one of the identified phosphoproteins upregulated in the SN of (G2019S) LRRK2 mice was MAPK kinase 4 (MKK4) phosphorylated at Ser257 (Chen et al., unpublished results). LRRK2 is believed to be a member of MLK subfamily of MAPKKKs.18, 19 MLKs are known to activate neuronal death signal pathway by phosphorylating downstream MKK4 at Ser257. Therefore, we hypothesized that (G2019S) LRRK2 displays an augmented kinase activity of phosphorylating MKK4 at Ser257.To provide evidence that (G2019S) LRRK2 mutation augments kinase activity and causes aberrant phosphorylation of MKK4 at Ser257, cDNA of FLAG-tagged MKK4 was transfected into HEK 293 cells stably expressing HA-tagged wild-type or (G2019S) LRRK2 (Figure 5a). Subsequent immunoprecipitation using anti-FLAG antibody and western blot analysis using anti-phospho-MKK4Ser257 antiserum showed that when expressed in 293 cells expressing wild-type LRRK2, FLAG-tagged MKK4 was not significantly phosphorylated at Ser257 (Figure 5b). On the other hand, immunoprecipitated protein level of phospho-MKK4Ser257was greatly increased in 293 cells expressing FLAG-tagged MKK4 and (G2019S) LRRK2 (Figure 5b).(G2019S) LRRK2 activates MKK4-JNK-cJun pathway and promotes formation of active caspases in the SN of (G2019S) LRRK2 transgenic miceConsistent with results observed in HEK 293 cells, immunoblotting study using anti-phospho-MKK4Ser257 antibody showed that protein level of active phospho-MKK4Ser257 was greatly increased in the SN of (G2019S) LRRK2 mice at the age of 12 months (Figures 6a and b). Protein expression of phospho-MKK4Ser257 was not significantly altered in the SN of transgenic mice expressing wild-type LRRK2 (Figure 6a).Activated phospho-MKK4Ser257 phosphorylates and activates downstream JNKs. Western blot analysis using anti-phospho-JNKThr183/Tyr185antiserum, which recognizes phosphorylated and activated JNKs, was performed to visualize JNK activation in the SN. Compared with wild-type mice, protein expression of active phospho-JNKThr183/Tyr185 was significantly upregulated in the SN of 12-month-old (G2019S) LRRK2 mice (Figure 6a).A principal target of activated JNK is transcription factor c-Jun. The transcriptional activity of c-Jun is stimulated by JNK-mediated phosphorylation at Ser63, leading to increased expression of target genes that initiate the apoptotic cascade and caspase activation.18, 19 Western blot analysis using anti-phospho-c-JunSer63 antibody demonstrated the expected upregulated expression of active phospho-c-JunSer63 in the SN of (G2019S) LRRK2 transgenic mice at 12 months of age (Figure 6a).Active phospho-c-JunSer63 causes neuronal death by enhancing the transcription of Bim and FasL.28, 29, 30 Bim, a member of pro-apoptotic BH3-only proteins, promotes cell death of CNS neurons including SNpc dopaminergic neurons by binding to Bcl-2 family pro-survival proteins and facilitating activation of Bax/Bak, which subsequently induces mitochondrial release of cytochrome-c and caspase-9 activation.31 By interacting with its cell surface receptor Fas, FasL promotes neuronal apoptosis via activating caspase-8.29 Consistent with our hypothesis that (G2019S) LRRK2 induces the activation and phosphorylation of c-Jun, mRNA expression of Bim or FasL was significantly upregulated in the SN of 12-month-old (G2019S) LRRK2 mice (Figure 6b).JNK-c-Jun-Bim/FasL cascade induces the formation of active caspase-9 and caspase-8 and causes neuronal death by activating intrinsic and extrinsic apoptotic pathways.29, 30, 31, 32 Therefore, it was hypothesized that (G2019S) LRRK2 causes degeneration of SNpc dopaminergic neurons in (G2019S) LRRK2 mice by promoting the formation of active caspase-9, caspase-8, and caspase-3. In accordance with this hypothesis, protein level of cleaved active caspase-9, active caspase-8, or active caspase-3 was greatly increased in the SN of 12-month-old (G2019S) LRRK2 mice (Figure 7a). Wild-type LRRK2 failed to induce the formation of active caspase-3, caspase-8, or caspase-9 in the SN of LRRK2 transgenic mice (Figure 7a). Confocal immunofluorescence imaging study further showed that active caspase-9 (Figure 7b; 27±3% TH-positive neurons; n=4 animals) and active caspase-3 (Figure 7c; 32±4% TH-positive cells; n=4 animals) were found in the cytoplasm of TH-positive SNpc dopaminergic neurons of 12-month-old (G2019S) LRRK2 mice. In contrast, the formation of active caspase-9 or caspase-3 was not observed in TH-positive SNpc dopaminergic cells of LRRK2 transgenic mice at the same age (Figures 7b and c; n=4 animals)."
28582929	LRRK2 co-localizes with mitochondria and can induce mitochondrial fragmentationLRRK2 has been shown to be associated with the intracellular membranous system (Biskup et al.2006) and exogenous expression of LRRK2 induces mitochondrial-dependent neuronal cell death (Iaccarino et al. 2007). We examined the localization of endogenous LRRK2 in primary cultured cortical neurons and found that it was widely distributed in the cytosol and partially co-localized with Cyto C (marker for mitochondria) (Fig. 1a). When expressed in cortical neurons, both LRRK2 WT and LRRK2 G2019S could induce mitochondrial fragmentation 24 h after transfection, with the effect being more severe for LRRK2 G2019S, which was correlated with cell death as we and others have reported (Iaccarino et al. 2007; Cui et al. 2011) (Fig. 1b,c). 48 h after transfection, there was an increase in LRRK2-WT-induced mitochondrial fragmentation (Fig. 1c). This result supports the gain-of-function theory for LRRK2 proposed previously (West et al. 2007) and shows that LRRK2 is likely to be an important regulator of mitochondrial fission/fusion dynamics.Since cycles of mitochondrial fission and fusion are crucial for cell survival and bioenergetic functionality, we concentrated on studying the effects of LRRK2 on mitochondrial fragmentation. We expressed T-dimer2 (Td2, an enhanced red fluorescent protein) -fused LRRK2 in different cell types, including neurons, and found that Td2-LRRK2 is uniformly expressed in both cortical neurons (Fig. 1d) and HeLa cells (Figure S1). The expression pattern was similar to that of endogenous LRRK2. More interestingly, LRRK2 appeared to become more concentrated in mitochondria in those cells with fragmented mitochondria (Fig. 1d). In addition to neurons, LRRK2 WT and LRRK2 G2019S also induced dramatic mitochondrial fragmentation in HeLa cells and cultured glia cells (Figs 1e and 5band S2).LRRK2 interacts with and is partially co-localized with DLP1To determine whether the increase in mitochondrial fragmentation is because of the effect of LRRK2 on mitochondrial dynamics, we explored the possibility that mitochondrial fission/fusion machinery is involved. Specific interactions were detected with co-transfection and immunoprecipitation assays between LRRK2 and hFis1 (Fig. 2a) and DLP1 (Fig. 2b), but not with mitochondrial fusion-related factors, Mfn1or Mfn2 (data not shown). Both LRRK2 WT and LRRK2 G2019S could interact with DLP1 WT and the dominant-negative form of DLP1, DLP1 K38E (Fig. 2b), indicating that the interaction between them is independent of DLP1 activity.To characterize which part of LRRK2 interacts with DLP1, we constructed four different fragments of LRRK2 and co-expressed them with DLP1. Analysis of the immunoprecipitates revealed clear interactions between DLP1 and the ROC-COR domain of LRRK2 (Fig. 2c). To evaluate whether or not endogenous LRRK2 and DLP1 interact with each other, lysates from embryonic and adult brains of C57 mice were subjected to co-immunoprecipitation with LRRK2 (Fig. 2d) and DLP1 (Fig. 2e) antisera separately. Analysis of the immunoprecipitates using western immunoblotting with LRRK2 and DLP1 antisera revealed clear interactions between the endogenous proteins (Fig. 2d and e). It is interesting to note that DLP1 did not interact with LRRK2 in embryonic brain as apparently as in the adult brain.In addition to their interaction with each other, confocal imaging showed that DLP1 and LRRK2 had similar expression patterns in HeLa cells (Figure S1). Endogenous LRRK2 was further confirmed to partially co-localize with DLP1 in cortical neurons (Fig. 3a). These results suggest that DLP1 is very likely to be involved in LRRK2-induced mitochondrial fission.LRRK2 induces the translocation of DLP1 to mitochondria and co-expression of LRRK2 and DLP1 accelerates the clearance of mitochondriaGiven that endogenous LRRK2 interacts with DLP1 on mitochondria, we speculated that LRRK2 might regulate mitochondrial fission via DLP1. To test this hypothesis, we investigated the effect of LRRK2 expression on DLP1. As shown in Fig. 3b i, ii), similar to their endogenous counterparts, both tagged DLP1 and LRRK2 were mainly cytoplasmic, however, some of the proteins were localized on mitochondria (Fig. 3b i). However, when both LRRK2 and DLP1 were co-expressed in primary cortical neurons, most DLP1 translocated from the cytosol to the mitochondria in both the soma and neurites of neurons (Figs 3b iii, iv and S3).DLP1 has been shown previously to induce fission through translocating from the cytosol to the outer membrane of the mitochondria (Smirnova et al. 2001; James et al. 2003; Yoon et al. 2003). Therefore, it is possible that LRRK2 may contribute to mitochondrial fragmentation by promoting the translocation of DLP1 to the mitochondria. It was interesting to note that co-expression of LRRK2 and DLP1 in HeLa cells induced a dramatic clearance of mitochondria with the remaining mitochondria accumulating in the peripheral area around the nucleus (Fig. 4a and b).Since LRRK2 has been shown to be a kinase, it was intriguing to see if LRRK2 would induce the phosphorylation of DLP1. As shown in Fig. 4c, endogenous DLP1 was immunoprecipitated from cells transfected with different forms of LRRK2 and the phosphorylated form of DLP1 was examined. The wild type LRRK2 and LRRK2 G2019S, but not the kinase dead form of LRRK2 could induce apparent phosphorylation of DLP1. We noticed that LRRK2 G2019S did not induce DLP1 phosphorylation much more apparently than wild type LRRK2. It is possible that phosphorylation of DLP1 by LRRK2 may also lead to its degradation as many other proteins. LRRK2 G2019S may induce more phosphorylation of DLP1 as well as its faster degradation. Therefore, we could not detect very apparent difference between WT and G2019S LRRK2.LRRK2-induced mitochondrial fragmentation depends on DLP1To determine whether or not DLP1 plays a role in LRRK2-induced mitochondrial fragmentation, we knocked down the expression of DLP1 by RNA interference in HeLa cells (Fig. 5a) which have been transfected with LRRK2 WT or LRRK2 G2019S. The percentage of cells with fragmented mitochondria became comparable to cells transfected with control vector (Fig. 5b). It was interesting to notice that LRRK2 expressing cells with knockdown of DLP1 have even lower level of fragmented mitochondria than that of the control. We also adopted a stable HeLa cell line in which expression of DLP1 is down-regulated by shRNA and got similar results (data not shown). Since DLP1 is essential for mitochondria fission (Lee et al. 2004), our results indicate that LRRK2 is likely to function upstream of DLP1 in promoting mitochondrial fission.Expression of LRRK2 leads to increased ROS levelsMitochondria are the primary producers of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and mitochondrial dysfunction may lead to increased oxidative stress through production of ROS and subsequent chronic mitochondrial fission and cell death (Lin and Beal 2006; Van Laar and Berman 2009). It has been thus suggested that ROS may be associated with different neurodegenerative diseases. As expression of LRRK2 can induce mitochondrial fission and apoptosis, we went on to test whether or not expression of LRRK2 could lead to oxidative stress. The carboxy derivative of fluorescein, carboxy-H2DCFDA (C400), was used to determine ROS levels in cells transfected with either LRRK2 WT or LRRK2 G2019S. As shown in Fig. 6, both LRRK2 WT and LRRK2 G2019S increased ROS levels significantly compared with the control, while the kinase-dead LRRK2 mutant did not increase ROS levels. This indicates that different forms of LRRK2 can induce oxidative stress depending on their kinase activities."
28582930	Generation of murine LRRK2 knockout miceThe targeting strategy for generation of LRRK2 knockout (KO) mice is shown in Figure ​Figure1A.1A. Homozygous mice received from Ozgene PLC were bred to Jackson C57BL6/J mice and subsequent heterozygous offspring were bred together to obtain wild type (WT), heterozygous (HET) and KO animals. Northern blotting analysis with a probe designed to LRRK2 exon 24–27 confirmed the absence of the ~9 kb LRRK2 mRNA transcript in KO mice and a reduced transcript signal in the HET mice (Figure ​(Figure1B).1B). Similarly, immunoblotting confirmed absence of LRRK2 protein band in the KO mice and a diminished signal in HET mice (Figure ​(Figure1C).1C). Immunohistochemistry also revealed specific signal in the WT compared to KO (Figure ​(Figure11D).To determine if any compensatory mRNA changes occurred in the paralog LRRK1, we used quantitative Taqman assay with a probe to murine LRRK1 to compare WT, HET and KO mice. No significant alterations in LRRK1 mRNA levels were observed in any of the brain regions tested. We also checked mRNA levels of SNCA, MAPT or PARKIN and found no differences ( Additional file 1: Figure S1).LRRK2 KO mice were fertile and appeared to be healthy from birth, with body weights comparable to WT littermates within the study period. HET x HET breedings yielded Mendelian ratios in line with expected inheritance (from over 70 litters 24.4 % WT, 51.6 % HET, 24 % KO).Subsequent characterization experiments were performed to compare KO and WT mice at different aging time points. Due to animal costs and space restraints, we included a HET group in some, but not all, of these analyses.Dopaminergic system characterizationLRRK2 expression is normally found in high levels in the striatum so we reasoned that loss of LRRK2 may impact the functional integrity of the nigro-striatal dopaminergic pathway. To determine if dopamine neurons or their processes were altered in the substantia nigra, we performed stereological counts of tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) positive neurons and dendrites in KO and WT mice aged 18–20 months. No differences in neuronal estimates were observed between KO mice (mean estimate ± SEM; 13,766 ± 471) compared to their WT littermates (12,267 ± 481) (Figure ​(Figure2A).2A). Similarly, there were no differences between dendritic estimates for WT (149,763 ± 6213) and KO (153,873 ± 4351) (Figure ​(Figure2B).2B). Next, we examined dopamine axonal neurochemistry by analyzing total dopamine content in striatal lysates by HPLC from 10 month and 18 month KO mice and WT littermates (Figure ​(Figure2C-G,2C-G, data shown only for 18 months) and found dopamine and its metabolite 3,4-dihydroxyphenylacetic acid (DOPAC), and homovanillic acid (HVA) levels were equivalent in KO and WT animals at both time points.Since total striatal dopamine includes dopamine that is stored, synthesized, released and taken up, we hypothesized that we may observe differences in KO mice by investigating these mechanisms independently. First, we performed microdialysis to measure extracellular release of dopamine in vivo. Extracellular dopamine levels were measured before and after KCl-evoked dopamine response in WT, HET and KO mice aged 3–4 months of age (Figure ​(Figure2H).2H). Baseline levels of dopamine were not found to differ between WT (0.13 ± 0.06 pg/μl), HET (0.15 ± 0.06 pg/μl) or KO mice (0.16 ± 0.07 pg/μl). When post-KCl dopamine levels were normalized to the average of their individual basal dopamine levels (i.e. % response) no significant differences were observed (Figure ​(Figure2I).2I). Next, we examined dopamine uptake in the WT, HET and KO mice using a radioactive uptake assay with [3H] dopamine. Uptake was comparable across the three groups suggesting a functionally intact dopamine transporter ( Additional file 2: Figure S2A). Concluding that release, storage and uptake of dopamine appear to be normal, we then examined D2-autoreceptor mediated synthesis and release, which is one of the feedback mechanisms in the striatum. It is well known that antagonizing pre-synaptic D2 autoreceptors can remove this feedback inhibition and cause increased synthesis as well as release of dopamine [24]. WT, HET and KO mice were treated with the D2 receptor antagonist raclopride, sacrificed 30 min later and HPLC analysis performed to quantify dopamine and metabolites. As expected, dopamine turnover, as measured by the ratio of dopamine metabolites to stores of dopamine increased dramatically [One way ANOVA ps < 0.0001 for DOPAC/dopamine and HVA/dopamine] following treatment with raclopride ( Additional file 2: Figure S2B, C). However, Tukey’s post hoc comparisons did not reveal differences in this response between WT, HET or KO mice, suggesting that autoreceptor-mediated feedback is normal in the absence of LRRK2. A significant increase in levels of serine-40 phosphorylated TH after raclopride treatment was also observed (indicating increased synthesis), but this response was not different between WT, HET or KO mice (data not shown). Finally, we examined striatal receptor density for both dopamine D1 and D2 receptors by autoradiography in 10 and 18 month old WT and KO mice and no differences were observed ( Additional file 3: Figure S3A-D).Analysis of striatal dendritic spinesWe have previously shown that LRRK2 G2019S transgenic mice have impaired neurite outgrowth in vitro[25] and in vivo[26] as well as a reduced number of mature spines in the hippocampus [26]. We have also reported that neurite outgrowth was increased in both midbrain and hippocampal cultures derived from LRRK2 KO mice [25]. As LRRK2 has previously been linked to ERM proteins and the actin cytoskeleton [27-31] we hypothesized that the loss of LRRK2 in the striatum in KO mice, an area where it is normally highly expressed, may impact on striatal dendritic spines. We counted spine number in Golgi-Cox labeled medium spiny neurons (MSN) of brains from aged (18+ months) KO and WT mice. Spines were classified into different morphological types [32]. No differences were found in spine numbers between in KO and WT mice suggesting that lack of LRRK2 has no effect on MSN spine dynamics in vivo ( Additional file 4: Figure S4).Proliferation / Neurogenesis studiesAs LRRK2 is normally expressed in the hippocampal dentate gyrus and proliferation, neurogenesis and migration are impaired in G2019S BAC mice [26], we sought to ascertain whether loss of expression has an impact on cell proliferation. We analyzed the effect of loss of LRRK2 on newly generated cells in the hippocampal dentate gyrus after a single injection of BrdU. Unbiased stereological counting methods were applied to estimate the number of BrdU-labeled cells. No differences were observed in proliferation between KO and WT mice ( Additional file 5: Figure S5A). Since doublecortin (DCX) expression levels in adult brain reflect neurogenesis [33], we also performed counts on DCX labeled neurons in the hippocampus and these were also found to be comparable in KO and WT mice ( Additional file 5: Figure S5B) suggesting normal neurogenesis occurs in KO mice.NeuropathologyHameotoxylin and eosin revealed morphology of KO mouse brains to be normal up to 20 months of age. To assess mice for neuropathological alterations we examined young (3–6 months), middle aged (10–13 months) and aged (18+ months) WT, HET and KO mice for a variety of markers associated with Parkinson’s disease pathology including alpha-synuclein, tau and Iba-1. In agreement with a previous report [34], no overt differences were observed with any of these markers between WT, HET and KO mice. As we have previously shown alterations in tau regulation in our BAC mutant LRRK2 G2019S model, we performed quantitative immunoblotting with tau antibodies (tau-5, CP-13 and tau-1) in lysates from aged WT and KO mice. Our results indicate that tau regulation is normal in KO mice ( Additional file 6: Figure S6).Behavioral AnalysisOpen-field TestIn the initial characterization, we focused on the analysis of spontaneous exploratory locomotor behavior evaluated in the open-field test. The open-field test assesses spontaneous exploration of mice as well as their emotional response after being exposed to much larger than a home cage and brightly illuminated unfamiliar environment [35-37]. The rationale behind this approach was based on evidence that anxiety disorders, which affect about 40 % of PD patients [38,39] and other psychiatric symptoms can precede the onset of motor symptoms, such as bradykinesia, rigidity, resting tremor and postural instability in PD by decades [39]. The open-field test, which combines the evaluation of anxiety as well as spontaneous locomotor activity, therefore presents an appropriate paradigm for the phenotyping characterization of the KO mice. The test has been successfully used with other familial Parkinson disease mouse models, for example mice deficient in parkin gene [40].We characterized the behavior of KO and WT mice in the open-field test, adopting longitudinal experimental design, at a young (7 months) and older (16 months) time point. The evaluation was done in one 5-min session at each age in order to minimize the saving effect and habituation to the test due to repeated testing. Data was analyzed by repeated measures ANOVA followed by Student’s t-tests for independent samples (to assess the genotype effect at each testing age) and matched-pairs samples (to assess the age effect within each genotype).Overall analysis of the exploration of the open-field arena by KO and WT mice revealed no differences in the length of walking distance, walking speed or onset of exploration between the genotypes. The KO mice tended to spend more time on longer (> 5 s) rests than WT mice during their exploration (p < 0.05, ANOVA, genotype effect), however, high variability of this behavior did not yield significant differences at α = 0.05 at each age of testing (Figure ​(Figure3A).3A). The number of rests and shorter (< 5 s) stops did not differ between the genotypes.Mice of both genotypes explored the center of the arena less at 16 months than at 7 months test (15.9 s ± 1.6 for 16-month and 25.0 s ± 3.5 for 7-month mice respectively, p < 0.001, ANOVA, age effect). However, KO mice explored the center of the open-field arena significantly less than the WT mice (15.0 % ± 2.4 and 25.9 % ± 2.8 of time averaged across age for KO and WT mice respectively, p < 0.01, ANOVA, genotype effect). The difference was significant at both at 7 (p < 0.05, t-test) and 16 (p < 0.01, t-test) months of age (Figure ​(Figure33B).This shorter time of exploration of the inner area of the field by the KO mice was likely due to their increased thigmotaxic (wall hugging) behavior (p < 0.001, ANOVA, genotype effect). The KO mice spent between 18 % to 87 % and 53 % to 91 % of their exploratory activity moving within close proximity of the wall during 7- and 16-month tests respectively. In contrast, the WT controls showed thigmotaxic behavior within a range of 9 % to 48 % and 36 % to 66 % during respective tests. Representative examples of the exploratory paths, reflecting the differences in the thigmotaxic behavior, are presented in Figure ​Figure4.4. Overall, the thigmotaxic behavior increased with age (p < 0.001, ANOVA age effect), with no significant interaction between the genotype and age factors. The differences in thigmotaxic behavior between the genotypes were significant at both 7 (p < 0.01, t-test) and at 16 (p < 0.001, t-test) months of age (Figure ​(Figure33C).Our analysis also revealed that overall, the exploratory paths of KO mice were less curvy and tortuous as compared to the paths of the WT counterparts (p < 0.001, ANOVA, genotype effect) and path tortousity was lower in mice of both genotypes during tests at 16 months (p < 0.001, ANOVA, age effect). The specific comparisons revealed a significant genotype effect on path tortuosity only at 16 months (p < 0.001, t-test, Figure ​Figure33D).Lastly, the KO mice approached an object placed in the center of the arena with longer latencies than WT mice (p < 0.05, ANOVA, genotype effect). In general, KO mice tended to spend less time exploring the object than WT mice (averaged across age 4.96 ± 0.09 and 9.45 ± 0.15 seconds respectively, p = 0.06, ANOVA, genotype effect). The borderline significance of the genotype effect was due to high variability in this behavior at 7-months (Figure ​(Figure3E).3E). At 16 months, however, the KO mice explored the object significantly less (p <0.05, t-test, Figure ​Figure3E).3E). The KO mice also approached the object less frequently (p < 0.05, ANOVA, genotype effect), with significant differences at each age of testing (ps < 0.05, t-test for 7 and 16 months, Figure ​Figure3F).3F). All mice approached the object less frequently when tested at the older age (p < 0.05, ANOVA, age effect).In summary, our results indicate that the KO mice showed abnormal spontaneous exploratory behavior in the open-field test, which was characterized by significantly higher thigmotaxic exploration of the arena. This result might be indicative of increased anxiety in the KO mice. Thigmotaxic behavior has been previously reported as a reliable measure of anxiety in the pre-clinical studies testing anxiolytic drugs [41]. In spite of the observed differences, we interpret these results cautiously, since most of the open-field test measures are interdependent [37]. We focused our emphasis on thigmotaxic behavior since it is likely that the initial prevalent engagement in this behavior affects other measures, like the exploration of inner area (r2 = 0.49, and r2 = 0.72 for 7 and 16 months respectively, ps = 0.001), and path tortuosity (r2 = 0.38 – 7 months, and r2 = 0.45 – 16 months, ps < 0.001).Motor testsNext, in a separate 7 month old cohort, we examined motor behavior in KO mice and compared this to both WT and HET littermates. Motor co-ordination/balance was examined by rotarod performance and gait was examined by digigait footprint analysis. Since the weights of the mice in each genotype did not differ significantly (p > 0.2, ANOVA), body weight was not used as a covariate in the analysis [42]. Analysis of performance on an accelerating rod revealed significant differences between the groups (p < 0.02, ANOVA). Subsequent, post-hoc analysis revealed that KO mice performed significantly better than their WT littermates, spending ~20 % (p < 0.01, Tukey’s test) longer on the rod (Figure ​(Figure55).The gait analysis was performed at three different speeds (14, 18 and 24 cm/sec) and compared a number of spatial and temporal indices between WT, HET and KO mice. Overall, there were no significant differences between the genotypes for stride lengths or any other of the recorded indices (Table ​(Table1)1) suggesting gait and thus striatal function remains intact.Inflammatory and degenerative alterations in kidney of LRRK2 KO miceTwo groups have previously identified abnormalities in the kidneys of LRRK2 KO mice including morphological changes, lysosomal and autophagic alterations, vacuolization and accumulation of pigment [34,43]. We examined kidneys from mice aged 3 to 20 months and also observed coloration (darkening) changes beginning as early as 3 months (Figure ​(Figure6A).6A). Significant enlargement was observed in the kidneys from the oldest mice (mean ± SEM; for KO female 0.23 ± 0.01 g and female WT 0.19 ± 0.01 g, p < 0.05 t-test; male KO 0.35 ± 0.02 g and male WT 0.22 ± 0.01 g, p < 0.001 t-test). At the gross level, kidneys from HET mice did not differ from WT counterparts (Figure ​(Figure6A)6A) therefore we limited subsequent analysis to KO and WT. Hematoxylin and eosin staining revealed inflammatory abnormalities, vacuolization and pigmentation in KO kidneys as young as 3 months, which was progressive with age (Figure ​(Figure6B).6B). We performed histological staining for a number of different markers including p62 (an ubiquitin-binding protein involved in cell signaling, oxidative stress and autophagy, found to be upregulated in many neurodegenerative diseases), Periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) stain for glycoproteins, iron (Gomori's Prussian blue) and melanin (Fontana-Masson) staining for pigment and immunohistochemistry for PD related proteins alpha-synuclein and ubiquitin. The KO kidney pigment was negative for iron and melanin. PAS staining revealed abnormal granular staining reminiscent of lipofuscin in the proximal tubules of KO mice as young as 3 months of age, progressing at 12 months and becoming severe by 18 months (data not shown). These granular inclusions were also autofluorescent, the intensity increasing with age (Figure ​(Figure6B).6B). Increased p62 immunostaining in the same cells in KO mice was observed as early as 3 months of age, although quantitative differences were not detectable by immunoblot at this age (Figure ​(Figure7).7). The intensity of p62 immunostaining progressed with age, and by 12 months quantitative differences were evident. By 18 months the KO mice had on average a 15-fold increase (p < 0.01, t-test) in immunoblot relative band density compared to WT controls (Figure ​(Figure7).7). We were unable to corroborate the previous reports of increases in alpha-synuclein or ubiquitin [34,44] in KO mice neither by immunohistochemistry nor by immunoblotting.To further examine the granular pathology at the ultra-structural level, we performed electron microscopy in kidneys from 18 months old KO and WT mice (Figure ​(Figure6C).6C). Tubular epithelial cells in the renal cortex of KO kidney were found to contain degenerating debris and accumulation of pigment resembling lipofuscin, both absent from WT kidney. Although the debris was significant, some normal tubular epithelial cells were still present and no evidence of abnormal mitochondria was found. Following on from conflicting reports of impaired/biphasic or no change autophagy in LRRK2 KO mice [34,43,44] we performed immunoblotting with LC-3 antibody in kidney lysates from mice aged 3, 12 and 18 months old. No significant differences were seen at the 3 and 12 month time-point. However in KO mice aged 18 months we observed a significant 2.8 fold increase in intensity of the LC-3 II band (p < 0.05, t-test) indicating an increase, rather than the previously reported decrease."
28582931	Parkinson's disease (PD) is the second most common neurodegenerative disease in the world. It affects over 1 million Americans, and more than 60 000 patients are newly diagnosed each year.1,2 Recent genetic studies have revealed an underlying genetic cause in at least 10% of all PD cases,3 which provides new opportunities for the discovery of molecularly targeted therapeutics that may ameliorate neurodegeneration. Among the genes associated with PD, leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) is unique because a missense mutation, G2019S, is frequently found in both familial and sporadic PD cases.4−9 The G2019S mutation increases kinase activity, which may result in activation of the neuronal death signal pathway, suggesting that small molecule LRRK2 kinase inhibitors may be able to serve as a new class of therapeutics for the treatment of PD.10−13 Transgenic G2019S LRRK2 mice aged to 12–16 months display progressive degeneration of the substantia nigra pars compacta (SNpc) dopaminergic neurons and Parkinson's phenotypes of motor dysfunction, suggesting that this mutation may be functionally relevant to the disease.14LRRK2 kinase inhibitors are being actively pursued both as “tools” to pharmacologically interrogate normal and pathological LRRK2 biology and as experimental therapeutic agents. For example, LRRK2-IN-1 (1)15 and CZC-25146 (2)16 have been reported as the first-generation “tool” inhibitors that exhibit excellent potency and selectivity for LRRK2. However, none of these compounds are able to efficiently cross the mouse blood–brain barrier (BBB) and inhibit LRRK2 kinase activity, which limits their utility in murine PD models and eventual clinical development.15,16 Here, we report that a lower molecular weight 2,4-diaminopyrimidine, HG-10-102-01 (4), maintains highly potent and selective inhibition of LRRK2 and is, to our knowledge, the first compound reported to be capable of inhibiting LRRK2 phosphorylation in mouse brain.Several 2,4-diaminopyrimidine-based inhibitors of LRRK2 have been reported including LRRK2-IN-1 (1),15 CZC-25146 (2),16 and TAE684 (3),17 but none of these compounds are capable of effectively inhibiting phosphorylation of Ser910 and Ser935 of LRRK2 in mouse brain at intraperitoneal doses of up to 100 mg/kg. Analysis of predicted docked conformations of these compounds to homology models of LRRK2 suggests that the 4-anilino moiety of each compound occupies quite distinct regions of the adenosine triphosphate (ATP)-binding site. In an attempt to lower the molecular weight and remove possible disfavorable interactions with the protein, we explored compounds where the 4-anilino moiety was removed. We and others18,19 discovered that simplified structures such as 4 maintain the ability to potently inhibit the biochemical activity of wild-type and G2019S mutant LRRK2. Compound 4 exhibited biochemical IC50 values of 20.3 and 3.2 nM against wild-type LRRK2 and LRRK2[G2019S], respectively (Figure (Figure1).1). The biochemical potency of 4 for inhibition of wild-type LRRK2 and LRRK2[G2019S] is similar to that observed for LRRK2-IN-1 (1); however, 4 maintains inhibition of the A2016T mutation, which induces dramatic resistance to LRRK2-IN-1 (1) (Figure (Figure1). Although1). Although both LRRK2-IN-1 (1) and 4share the aminopyrimidine pharmacophore, a molecular model of 4 docked to a homology model of LRRK2 built based on a previously published crystallographic structure of anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK)20 suggests that there is less possibility for steric hindrance with the A2016T mutation (Figure (Figure22a,b).Compound 4 was prepared from commercially available 2,4,5-trichloropyrimidine and 3-methoxy-4-nitrobenzoic acid (Scheme 1). The 3-methoxy-4-nitrobenzoic acid 7 was subjected to chlorination with thionyl chloride followed by reaction with morpholine to form the corresponding amide 8, which was reduced by hydrogenation to yield aniline 9. 2,4,5-Trichloropyrimidine 5 was regioselectively aminated with methylamine to afford to 2,5-dichloro-N-methylpyrimidin-4-amine 6. Compound 6 was aminated with aniline 9 under acidic conditions to furnish the desired compound 4. We next examined the ability of 4 to inhibit LRRK2 in a cellular context in comparison to LRRK2-IN-1 (1). As there are no validated direct phosphorylation substrates of LRRK2, we monitored phosphorylation of Ser910 and Ser935, two residues whose phosphorylation is known to be dependent upon LRRK2 kinase activity21 (Figure (Figure3).3). Compound 4 induced a dose-dependent inhibition of Ser910 and Ser935 phosphorylation in both wild-type LRRK2 and LRRK2[G2019S] stably transfected into HEK293 cells (Figure (Figure3a).3a). Substantial dephosphorylation of Ser910 and Ser935 was observed at approximately 1 μM concentrations of 4 for wild-type LRRK2 and at a slightly lower dose of 0.3 μM for LRRK2[G2019S] (Figure (Figure3b),3b), which is a similar potency to that observed for LRRK2-IN-1 (1). Consistent with the biochemical results, 4 also induced dephosphorylation of Ser910 and Ser935 at a concentration of 1–3 μM in the drug-resistant LRRK2[A2016T + G2019S] and LRRK2[A2016T] mutants, revealing that the A2016T mutation is not an effective way to induce resistance to 4. We next examined the effect of 4 on endogenously expressed LRRK2 in human lymphoblastoid cells derived from a control and Parkinson's patient homozygous for the LRRK2[G2019S] mutation (Figure (Figure4a).4a). We found that increasing doses of 4 led to similar dephosphorylation of endogenous LRRK2 at Ser910 and Ser935, as was observed in HEK293 cells stably expressing wild-type LRRK2 or LRRK2[G2019S] (compare Figure Figure3a3a to Figure Figure4a).4a). Moreover, endogenous LRRK2 was also more sensitive to 4 than LRRK2-IN-1 (1), which is consistent with the trend that we observed in HEK293 cells. We also found that 4 induced similar dose-dependent Ser910 and Ser935 dephosphorylation of endogenous LRRK2 in mouse Swiss 3T3 cells and mouse embryonic fibroblast cells (Figure (Figure44b,c).The mouse pharmacokinetic profile of 4 demonstrated good oral bioavailability (%F = 67), a short half-life of 0.13 h, and low plasma exposure [502 h*ng/mL, area under the concentration–time curve (AUC)last] [complete pharmacokinetics (PK) parameters are in the Supporting Information]. The short half-life is likely the consequence of rapid first-pass metabolism as incubation with mouse liver microsomes also revealed a short T1/2 of 13 min.22 We next investigated the pharmacodynamic properties of 4 by monitoring inhibition of LRRK2 Ser910/Ser935 phosphorylation in kidney, spleen, and brain following intraperitoneal delivery of 100 mg/kg of 4. We observed near complete dephosphorylation of Ser910 and Ser935 of LRRK2 in all tissues including brain at this dose. We then repeated the study at lower doses of 50, 30, and 10 mg/kg, where we observed near complete inhibition in all tissues at 50 mg/kg but only partial inhibition in brain at the 30 and 10 mg/kg doses. These results indicate that 4 is a promising chemotype for achieving dephosphorylation of Ser910 and Ser935 in the brain. To further explore the ability of 4 to inhibit LRRK2 in vivo, we used a chemical proteomics approach, KiNativ, to monitor kinase inhibition in tissues from the inhibitor-treated animals. Brains and spleens from animals treated with 4 at 3, 10, 30, 50, and 100 mg/kg and LRRK2-IN-1 (1) at 100 mg/kg were evaluated and compared to vehicle-treated animal brains. Briefly, the brains were lysed in a 5× volume of buffer (no detergent) and labeled with an ADP-acylphosphate probe. Following sample workup and trypsin digestion, kinase labeling by the acylphosphate probe was quantitatively determined by mass spectrometry. Data were collected for >150 protein and lipid kinases (Supporting Information). Of the kinases profiled, only LRRK2 showed a clear and significant dose-related increase in engagement with 4. LRRK2 inhibition was ~40% at 30 mg/kg and ~70% at 50 and 100 mg/kg in the brain. Greater LRRK2 target engagement was observed in the spleen: ~40% at 3 mg/kg, ~80–90% at 10 mg/kg, and greater than 90% in the 30–100 mg/kg treated animals. In contrast, no LRRK2 inhibition was observed in brains of mice treated with 100 mg/kg LRRK2-IN-1 (1), consistent with the inability of the compound to induce dephosphosphorylation of the Ser910 and Ser935 sites of LRRK2 in the brain. Considering these inhibition values correspond to a 5× dilution of material relative to the intact brain, these engagement values correlate very well with the observed inhibition of Ser910 and Ser935 phosphorylation of LRRK2 by 4. No other kinases showed >50% inhibition at any dose of 4, and only JNK1/2/3 and TBK1 showed potential dose-related inhibition (~35–40% at 50 and 100 mg/kg), suggesting that compound 4 is a highly selective inhibitor of LRRK2.The kinase selectivity of 4 was further assessed using standard radioactivity-based enzymatic assays against a panel of 138 kinases (Dundee profiling).23 At a concentration of 10 μM, compound 4 only inhibited the kinase activities of mixed-lineage kinase 1 (MLK1) and MAP kinase-interacting serine/threonine-protein kinase 2 (MNK2) to greater than 80% of the dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) control (complete results are presented in the Supporting Information). Dose–response analysis revealed inhibition of MLK1 with an IC50 = 2.1 μM and MNK2 with an IC50 = 0.6 μM. KinomeScan analysis against a near comprehensive panel of 451 kinases at a concentration of 1 μM resulted in no interactions detected with kinases other than LRRK2[G2019S] with the exception of one mutant form of c-Kit (L576P) demonstrating the outstanding selectivity of this inhibitor (complete profiling results are provided in the Supporting Information).24 These results suggest that 4 is a highly selective LRRK2 inhibitor; however, further profiling of additional kinases and other ATP-dependent enzymes is still warranted.In summary, we have discovered that 4 is a potent biochemical and cellular inhibitor of LRRK2 kinase activity. Detailed characterization of 4 using LRRK2-IN-1 as a bench mark revealed that 4 significantly inhibited phosphorylation of wild-type LRRK2 and LRRK2[G2019S] mutant at Ser910 and Ser935 at 0.3–1.0 μM in cell culture, which is approximately the same potency as LRRK2-IN-1 (1). Compound 4 is relatively insensitive to the A2016T mutation, which suggests that this mutant will not be useful to validate whether the pharmacological effects of the compound are LRRK2-dependent. Compound 4 exhibits excellent kinase selectivity as assessed by recombinant kinases (138), KinomeScan (451 kinases), and KiNativ profiling. Compound 4 can inhibit phosphorylation of Ser910 and Ser935 of LRRK2 in brain and peripheral tissues following intraperitoneal doses of 50 mg/kg. Further optimization of this chemotype especially in regards to in vivo half-life will be reported in due course."
28582932	Co-immunoprecipitation of LRRK2 and α-synucleinIn order to investigate the interaction between LRRK2 and α-synuclein, we used mouse brain samples from WT and LRRK2 knockout animals. The immunoprecipitation of α-synuclein from mouse brain lysates pulled down LRRK2 in WT samples, but not in knockout samples (Fig. 1a). We also verified the interaction between LRRK2 and α-synuclein when the immunoprecipitations were performed in human brain lysates (data not shown).In order to investigate whether LRRK2 mutations alter the interaction with α-synuclein, we over-expressed WT or G2019S mutant LRRK2 together with α-synuclein in HEK-293 cells. Immunoprecipitation of LRRK2 from cells over-expressing Myc-LRRK2 (WT or G2019S mutant) together with α-synuclein pulled down α-synuclein (Fig. 1b). Consistently, when α-synuclein was immunoprecipitated, the LRRK2 proteins (WT and G2019S) were also co-immunoprecipitated (Fig. 1c). We did not find significant alterations in the pattern of co-immunoprecipitation between WT and G2019S mutant, indicating that the interaction between the two proteins is not disturbed by this mutation.Co-localization of LRRK2 and α-synuclein in PD brain and cell modelPD brain samples were examined to determine whether LRRK2 and α-synuclein or phosphorylated α-synuclein were co-localized. We found that LRRK2 increases along with α-synuclein in neurons prior to Lewy body formation (Fig. 2a) as well as depositing in some but not all of the hallmark inclusions (Fig. 2b–d). LRRK2 was also observed in phosphorylated α-synuclein-immunoreactive inclusions, often centralized to a radiating pattern of phosphorylated α-synuclein fibrils (Fig. 2f–h). Quantitation of the numbers of α-synuclein inclusions immunopositive for LRRK2 in ten PD cases (Table 1) indicates that 60 % of cingulate Lewy bodies and 43 % of nigral Lewy bodies contained both proteins (Fig. 2b, c). The specificity of the co-localization can be taken as genuine, as no 280-kDa LRRK2 band was detected on Western blot and no immunoreactivity in tissue sections in peptide pre-absorption experiments (see Supplementary Figure). There was no correlation between the number of α-synuclein-positive Lewy bodies and those also containing LRRK2 across the cases examined.We also interrogated an in vitro model that reproduces the formation of α-synuclein inclusions in H4 cells [17]. Using this model, we observed co-localization of endogenous LRRK2 with the α-synuclein-positive inclusions (Fig. 2e).Knocking down LRRK2 expression reduces α-synuclein aggregationTo further investigate the effect of LRRK2 on α-synuclein aggregation, LRRK2 expression was knocked down using shRNAs in the H4 cell model. Knocking down LRRK2 expression did not produce significant changes in endogenous α-synuclein or phosphorylated α-synuclein levels (Fig. 3a). Transiently transfecting these LRRK2-deficient cells with SynT and synphilin-1 expression plasmids showed that LRRK2 silencing significantly increased the number and decreased the size of α-synuclein inclusions resulting in a greater number of cells bearing smaller α-synuclein inclusions (Fig. 3b–d).Correlations between the levels of α-synuclein and LRRK2 in PDTo explore the relationship between protein levels of LRRK2 and α-synuclein in PD, 20 cases (controls and Braak PD stages IV and V, Supplementary Table) were analysed. Multivariate analysis factoring in age and post-mortem delay showed that the levels of total and phosphorylated α-synuclein were significantly increased over control levels only in PD brain regions with Lewy bodies (p < 0.001). In the cases examined, all stage IV cases had high Lewy body densities in the amygdala (Fig. 4a), while significant densities of cingulate Lewy bodies were observed in all stage V cases (Fig. 4b). No Lewy bodies were seen in the visual cortex of any case, although very small phosphorylated deposits were observed in stage V cases (Fig. 4c). In PD, there was a substantial 220 ± 20 % increase over controls in α-synuclein protein levels in the amygdala and a less substantial 48 ± 6 % increase in the cingulate cortex, with no change in the visual cortex (Fig. 4d, e). This pattern of regional increase in α-synuclein levels was even more striking when assessing phosphorylated α-synuclein protein levels (p = 0.01), as very low levels of phosphorylated α-synuclein were observed across all regions in controls compared to PD (Fig. 4e). There was a very large 60 ± 18-fold increase in phosphorylated α-synuclein protein levels in the PD amygdala, a 32 ± 4-fold increase in the PD cingulate cortex and an 8 ± 3-fold change in the PD visual cortex relative to controls (Fig. 4d, e).The expression of LRRK2 was analysed using the same methods in the same brain extracts (Fig. 5). Multivariate analysis co-varying for age or post-mortem delay showed that the levels of LRRK2 were increased in PD compared with controls in regions containing Lewy bodies (p < 0.04), with no difference between the LRRK2 levels in these Lewy body-containing regions (p = 0.6). Within these regions, there was a small but significant 23 ± 6 % increase over controls in full-length LRRK2 levels (Fig. 5a, b).To determine the relationship between LRRK2 and α-synuclein levels and PD, linear regression modelling was used assessing the protein levels obtained in the amygdala and cingulate cortex. This analysis revealed that increasing levels of LRRK2 and total and phosphorylated α-synuclein correlated with each other in PD but not controls (Fig. 5c, p < 0.001, β coefficients = 0.27, 0.33 and 0.37, respectively)."
28582933	To determine whether LRRK2 mutants affected mitochondrial homeostasis, we measured the percent mitochondrial content [100 × (mitochondrial area/cytoplasmic area)] in the axons, dendrites, and soma of cortical neurons co-expressing COX8-GFP with LRRK2-WT, LRRK2-G2019S, or LRRK2-R1441C (Figure 1A and Supplemental Figure S1). Neurons were counterstained for MAP2 to distinguish dendrites from axons (Figure 1A and Supplemental Figure S2A). We found that LRRK2 PD-associated mutants, but not WT LRRK2, caused significant reductions in mitochondrial content in dendrites, but not axons, at 5 days after transfection (Figure 1, B and E, and Supplemental Figure S2A). The LRRK2-G2019S mutant also caused a significant decrease in somatic mitochondrial content that was not observed with the LRRK2-R1441C mutant (Figure 1D and Supplemental Figure S2B), although the LRRK2 plasmids resulted in equivalent protein expression (Supplemental Figure S2C). There were no morphological changes to dendrites at this time point (Figure 1C), indicating that the decrease in mitochondria density preceded subsequent reductions in dendritic area observed at 14 days after transfection.23 The kinase-deficient LRRK2 K1906M mutant had no effect on dendritic mitochondrial content (Supplemental Figure S3A). Because decreased dendritic mitochondrial content could underlie the dendrite/neurite retraction observed in culture and mouse models of LRRK2-related PD,19,22,23,25 we further investigated causes of this decrease in mitochondrial content. Mitochondrial trafficking is one process that could regulate the quantity of mitochondria by delivering or removing mitochondria from the dendrites. To determine whether LRRK2 mutants affected mitochondrial trafficking, we measured anterograde (away from the soma) and retrograde (toward the soma) movement of COX8-GFP–labeled mitochondria in dendrites at 2 to 5 days after transfection. The percentage of mobile mitochondria was not significantly changed between treatment conditions (eg, at 5 days, vector = 15.64 ± 0.42, WT = 15.71 ± 0.11, G2019S = 17.52 ± 1.41, and R1441C = 16.74 ± 1.64; P = 0.454). The ratio of anterograde/retrograde moving mitochondria per cell was likewise not significantly altered (Figure 2A). There was a trend toward a greater spread of faster-moving anterograde mitochondria in LRRK2-transfected neurons, but this did not result in significant alterations in the average anterograde (Figure 2B) or retrograde (Figure 2C) velocities in vector versus LRRK2 (WT or mutant) expressing neurons. Because significant changes in mitochondrial trafficking were not observed, we investigated the potential role of mitochondrial degradation. We first measured the levels of steady-state autophagy in cortical neurons expressing mutant LRRK2. The microtubule-associated protein LC3 is a key autophagy mediator that covalently attaches to autophagosome membranes.40 By using GFP fused to LC3 (GFP-LC3), we investigated whether mutant LRRK2 altered the number of autophagosomes. Mutant LRRK2 caused an increase in autophagosomes compared with vector control (Figure 2D). To determine whether autolysosomal degradation contributed to the decrease in dendritic mitochondria, we inhibited lysosomal degradation with bafilomycin A using nontoxic doses previously shown to stabilize LC3-II from degradation,41,42 and confirmed using Western blot analysis and the tandem tfLC3 flux reporter42 (Supplemental Figure S3, B–D). The inhibition of autophagic degradation prevented the loss of dendritic mitochondria in neurons expressing mutant LRRK2 (Figure 2E). To further assess the involvement of autophagy, SH-SY5Y cells were used because they recapitulated the mutant LRRK2 effects observed in neurons (ie, increased autophagosomes,12,19 neurite shortening,12,19 and the selective reduction in the mitochondrial content of neurites) (Figure 2F), with no changes observed in the cell body for percentage of cytoplasmic area occupied by mitochondria (vector = 12.50 ± 0.54, WT = 14.56 ± 0.64, G2019S = 11.31 ± 0.64, and R1441C = 13.45 ± 0.83; P = 0.10). The inhibition of autophagy in SH-SY5Y cells using RNAi against ATG7, a protein essential for autophagy induction, also reversed the effects of LRRK2 mutants on neuritic mitochondrial density (Figure 2F).Because mitochondrial depolarization triggers mitochondrial degradation through autophagy (mitophagy) under multiple conditions,6,43,44 we assessed whether LRRK2 mutants affected mitochondrial inner membrane polarization. LRRK2 mutants, but not WT LRRK2, caused a significant decrease in dendritic mitochondrial polarization measured by TMRM staining 3 days after transfection (Figure 3, A and B). At this early time point, there was no change in mitochondrial content (Figure 3C), indicating that decreases in mitochondrial polarization preceded the dendritic mitochondrial loss seen after 5 days. Calcium homeostasis is essential for both neuronal and mitochondrial function, and aberrant elevations in intracellular calcium could lead to mitochondrial and cellular dysfunction.45 In addition to the endoplasmic reticulum, mitochondria contribute to the maintenance of neuronal calcium homeostasis.45,46 Because calcium metabolism and mitochondrial function are intrinsically linked,47 we investigated whether calcium metabolism was perturbed in neurons expressing mutant LRRK2. First, we measured the levels of intracellular calcium with Fura2-AM in transfected neurons after KCl stimulation. There was no difference in the peak intracellular calcium level after stimulation; however, there was a significant decrease in calcium signal recovery in neurons expressing mutant LRRK2 (Figure 4, A–C). The calcium signal recovery is affected by calcium channel inactivation and calcium efflux due to sequestration into organelles, such as endoplasmic reticulum or mitochondria, and pumping across the plasma membrane. To eliminate the channel inactivation component, we directly measured total calcium efflux from the cytoplasm as the rate of calcium signal decay after removal of KCl. The time constant (τ) of calcium efflux was used as a measure of its efficacy. We found that calcium efflux from the cytoplasm was significantly less efficient in mutant LRRK2-expressing neurons (Figure 4, D and E). To determine whether the mitochondrial status was responsible for the delayed calcium signal recovery, we measured the τ of calcium efflux in mutant LRRK2-expressing neurons treated with the mitochondrial proton uncoupler, CCCP (Figure 5, A and B). Mitochondrial depolarization by CCCP eliminated the difference in the τ of calcium efflux between neurons expressing mutant LRRK2 (relative) and either vector or WT LRRK2 (Figure 5B), implicating a role for altered mitochondrial handling of calcium in the pathophysiological characteristics of mutant LRRK2. To determine whether calcium dysregulation contributed to the increased turnover of mitochondria elicited by mutant LRRK2, we measured the mitochondrial membrane potential in neurons treated with the calcium chelator, BAPTA-AM. Treatment with BAPTA-AM prevented mitochondrial depolarization caused by mutant LRRK2 (Figure 5C). Furthermore, BAPTA-AM prevented elevations in autophagy and mitochondrial degradation in neurons and SH-SY5Y cells (Figure 5, D, E, and G), suggesting that mutant LRRK2-elicited deficits in calcium homeostasis led to mitochondrial depolarization and mitophagy. Calcium chelation was also sufficient to reverse the subsequent neurite shortening elicited by mutant LRRK2 in both neurons and SH-SY5Y cells (Figure 5, F and H).To identify the calcium pools involved in mutant LRRK2-induced mitochondrial degradation, we treated neurons with EGTA to chelate extracellular calcium. Similar to BAPTA-AM, EGTA prevented the reduction in the percentage of dendritic area occupied by mitochondria (vector = 32.87 ± 4.57, WT = 35.18 ± 2.79, G2019S = 30.55 ± 3.12, and R1441C = 32.14 ± 3.35; P = 0.78), suggesting that extracellular calcium influx was required for mutant LRRK2-induced mitophagy in unstimulated cultures. Because primary cortical neurons exhibited spontaneous synaptic activity,48 we studied whether voltage-gated calcium channel inhibition would prevent the calcium influx–induced mutant LRRK2 phenotype. There are three families of voltage-gated calcium channels: the Cav1 (L-type), the Cav2 (P/Q-, N-, and R-types), and the Cav3 (T-type). The L- and T-types are primarily located in the somatodendritic compartment, whereas the P/Q-, N-, and R-type channels are found, to some extent, in both axonal and somatodendritic compartments.49 T-type channels primarily facilitate small, transient currents, whereas the other channels underlie larger calcium fluxes. Therefore, we assessed whether inhibiting L-type or P/Q-, N-, and R-type channels would modulate mutant LRRK2-induced mitochondrial degradation.We found that nitrendipine, an inhibitor of L-type calcium channels, prevented mitochondrial degradation in neurons expressing mutant LRRK2 (Figure 6A). However, a mixture of NiCl2, ω-agatoxin, and ω-conotoxin that inhibit N-, P/Q-, and R-type calcium channels, respectively, was effective only in the R1441C model (Figure 6A). Furthermore, inhibition of L-type calcium channels and, to a lesser extent, N-, P/Q-, and R-type calcium channels prevented dendritic shortening caused by mutant LRRK2 (Figure 6B). Together, these results suggested that altered calcium homeostasis in mutant LRRK2-expressing neurons contributed to mitochondrial depolarization, mitophagy, and dendritic shortening. By normalizing the intracellular levels of calcium via voltage-gated calcium channel inhibitors, we prevented the mitophagy and dendritic shortening caused by mutant LRRK2."
28582934	2.1. Deficiency on mRNA and protein level in LRRK2 KOmiceTo confirm successful LRRK2 gene knockout, we performed in situ hybridization on coronal brain sections from LRRK2 KOmice and wildtype (WT) littermate controls using an mRNA probe for endogenous mouse LRRK2. As previously described in WT mice, LRRK2 mRNA was detected in the striatum and the piriform cortex, and at lower levels in cortical areas and in the hippocampus (Galter et al., 2006). In contrast the in situ hybridization on brain sections from homozygous LRRK2 KO mice resulted in a remarkably reduced LRRK2 signal, while some weak signal was still visible in the outer cortex layers and CA1 (Fig. 1B, D). Additionally, Lrrk2 protein expression was analyzed by immunoblotting brain lysates from LRRK2 KO mice and WT littermate controls. In contrast to homo- genates of WT littermate controls, the monoclonal anti-Lrrk2 antibody visualized no protein band at the expected mole- cular weight on immunoblots of brain lysates from LRRK2 KO mice (Fig. 2, see lanes 4–6).2.2.        Proliferation of neural precursor cells in the adultDG is unchanged in LRRK2 KO miceWe analyzed the effect of LRRK2 deficiency on newly gener- ated cells in the hippocampal DG 24 h after two 5-bromo-2- deoxyuridine (BrdU) injections. Proliferation was comparable,as the total number of BrdUþ newly generated cells in the SGZ  showed  no  significant  difference  between  LRRK2  KOmice and their  WT littermate controls  (Control  8117105;LRRK2 KO 667766; p ¼ 0.27; Fig. 3B), indicating no effect on cell proliferation in the DG.2.3.        Survival of newly generated cells in the adult DG isunchanged in LRRK2 KO miceCell survival in the DG was analyzed four weeks after the last BrdU injection in a second group of animals receiving BrdUover five consecutive days. The total number of BrdUþ cells inthe DG showed no difference between LRRK2 KO mice andWT littermate controls (Control 5367178; LRRK2 KO 380793;p ¼ 0.46; Fig. 4B), indicating no overall effect on cell survival in the DG. We further assessed proliferation in this experimen-tal  survival  paradigm  using  the  endogenous  proliferation marker Ki67 and confirmed no significant changes in prolif- eration between the LRRK2 KO group and their WT littermatecontrols   (Control   306775;   LRRK2   KO   390730;   p ¼ 0.34).Measurement of the DG volume showed no significant dif- ference  between the  LRRK2  KO  group  and  WT  littermatecontrols (Control 0.4470.02; LRRK2 KO 0.3970.02; p ¼ 0.053). Volumes  are  represented  in  mm3 Â 10À9.  Normalization  of BrdU as well as Ki67 cell counts to the volume of the DG didnot alter the results, indicating an unchanged density of BrdUþ and Ki67þ cells in the DG of LRRK2 KO mice (see Table 1).2.4.        Expression profile of surviving BrdUþ cells: increasedimmature neuronal fate in the absence of changes in the mature neuronal fate in LRRK2 KO miceAdult neurogenesis was studied by determining the neuronalfate of BrdU labeled cells. Using confocal microscopy, BrdUþ cells in the DG were analyzed for double labeling with theimmature  neuronal  marker  doublecortin  (DCX)  and  the mature neuronal marker Neuronal specific Nuclear protein (NeuN; Fig. 5A, B). The percentage of early neuronal differ-entiation of BrdUþ cells, i.e. BrdUþ/DCXþ cells out of the total BrdUþ  cell  population  was  significantly  increased  in  the LRRK2 KO group compared to WT littermate controls (Control1773%;  LRRK2  KO  3074%;  p ¼ 0.04;  Fig.  5C).  Likewise,  by normalization of the total number of BrdUþ/DCXþ neuro- blasts to the volume of the DG the density of double labeled neuroblasts  was  significantly  increased  in  the  LRRK2  KO group   compared   to   WT   littermate   controls   (Control99.6724.8; LRRK2 KO 186.8716; p ¼ 0.018). Values are repre- sented as cells/mm3 Â 109. Also LRRK2 KO mice displayed a tendency for increased mature neuronal differentiation ofBrdUþ cells as the percentage of BrdUþ/NeuNþ cells out of the total BrdUþ cell pool appeared higher in the LRRK2 KO group compared to WT littermate controls without reachingsignificance level (Control 4276%; LRRK2 KO 6278%; p ¼ 0.08;Fig. 5B). In parallel, normalizing the total number of BrdUþ/ NeuNþ neurons to the volume of the DG we did not observe significant differences in the neuronal density of LRRK2 KOmice compared to WT littermate controls (Control 448774; LRRK2  KO  7077298;  p ¼ 0.42).  Values  are  represented  as cells/mm3 Â 109.2.5.        Total number of DCXþ hippocampal neuroblastsin the adult DG is increased in LRRK2 KO miceAdult hippocampal neurogenesis was further characterized by  quantifying  the  total  number  of  immature  migrating neuroblasts expressing the early neuronal marker DCX in the DG. As previously shown in (Schulz et al., 2011), thenumber of DCXþ neuroblasts in the DG was significantly increased  by  48.6%  in  LRRK2  KO  mice  compared  to  WT littermate controls (Control 28917203; LRRK2 KO 42977325;p ¼ 0.006; Fig. 6A). Likewise, by normalization to the volume of the DG the density of DCXþ neuroblasts was significantly increased  in  LRRK2  KO  mice  compared  to  WT  littermatecontrols (Table 1). Representative overviews of the DG illus-trate the increased number of DCXþ cells in the LRRK2 KO group (Fig. 6E, F).2.6.        Increased dendritic complexity of young immatureneurons in the adult DG of LRRK2 KO miceTo study the effect of LRRK2 KO on the dendritic morphology of newly generated young immature neurons, we analyzed thelength  of  DCXþ  dendrites  in  the  DG.  Interestingly,  dendrite length  was  1.4  fold  increased  in  LRRK2  KO  mice  comparedwith  WT  littermate  controls  (Control  15079 mm;  LRRK2  KO359717 mm; po0.0001; Fig. 6B). We further analyzed the effect ofLRRK2 KO on dendritogenesis by quantifying the number of dendrite  branching  points.  We  observed  a  highly  significantincrease of dendrite branching points of DCXþ cells in the DG of LRRK2 KO mice by 2.4 fold compared to controls (Control1.670.11; LRRK2 KO 5.670.3; po0.0001; Fig. 6C). The complexityof  dendrites  in  LRRK2  KO  mice  was  further  confirmed  byquantifying   the   number   of   DCXþ   processes   intersecting concentric spheres that were placed around the DCXþ cell soma. In  parallel  to  (Arisi  and  Garcia-Cairasco,  2007),  most  of  thedendrites ended within the 50 mm and 100 mm circle, thereforein the inner molecular layer. The number of DCXþ processes crossing concentric spheres of those 50 mm and 100 mm radii were significantly increased in LRRK2 KO mice compared tocontrols   (50 mm:   Control   1.7570.11;   LRRK2   KO   2.6370.66;p¼ 0.018;   100 mm:   Control   1.970.67;   LRRK2   KO   3.570.6;p¼ 0.004; Fig. 6D). Thus, the summed dendritic length in the inner molecular layer, resulting from this pattern of terminationand arborization, was significantly increased in LRRK2 KO mice. Within further distance of 150 mm and 200 mm from the cellsoma the total number of intersecting DCXþ processes appeared higher in the LRRK2 KO group, however without reaching thesignificance   level   (150 mm:   Control   0.6370.47;   LRRK2   KO1.7271.33;   p¼ 0.12;   200 mm:   Control   0.1570.17;   LRRK2   KO1.2771.29; p¼ 0.09; Fig. 6D). Representative images illustrate the increased length and more complex arborization of dendrites inthe  LRRK2  KO  group  (Fig.  6G,  H).  This  finding  supports  the important role of LRRK2 for dendritic morphogenesis in newlygenerated DCXþ hippocampal neuroblasts (MacLeod et al., 2006; Parisiadou et al., 2009; Winner et al., 2011b).2.7.        Increased density of early and intermediate DCXþneuroblast subsets in the adult DG of LRRK2 KO miceDCX expression during adult neurogenesis begins at an early proliferation stage and extends until 3–4 weeks after the birth of the new cells (Brown et al., 2003). Following the increasedtotal number of DCXþ cells in LRRK2 KO mice, we further explored if LRRK2 has an additional impact on the matura-tion and migration process of neuroblasts during their first month of development. Morphological characteristics regarding dendritic processes as well as location within the DG granularlayer allow the distinction between different DCXþ populations (early, intermediate, and late; see schematic drawing; Fig. 7A),representative of  different  stages  of  neuronal maturation (Plumpe  et  al.,  2006).  According  to  these  morphological characteristics, we did not observe significant differences inthe percentage of early, intermediate, and late DCXþ stages per total number of DCXþ cells between LRRK2 KO mice and WT littermate controls (early: Control 39.171%; LRRK2 KO34.674.2%; p ¼ 0.32; intermediate: Control 34.271.7%; LRRK2 KO 38.172.7%; p ¼ 0.26; late: Control 26.771.3%; LRRK2 KO27.374.8%; p ¼ 0.9; Fig. 7B–D). But, normalization of the total numbers of different DCX subpopulations to the volume ofthe DG revealed a significant increase of the density of earlyand  intermediate  DCXþ  neuroblasts  in  LRRK2  KO  mice, whereas the density of late DCXþ young immature neurons was not significantly altered (early: Control 30447221; LRRK2KO  41027369.5;  p ¼ 0.04;  intermediate:  Control  26477152; LRRK2  KO  46317513;  p ¼ 0.006;  late:  Control  20737140.5; LRRK2  KO  366771231;  p ¼ 0.23).  Values  are  represented  as cells/mm3 Â 109.2.8.        Volume of the mossy fiber projection is increasedin LRRK2 KO miceTo study if LRRK2 KO has an effect on the axonal output of the DG we further analyzed the morphology of the mossy fiber (MF) tract projecting from the dentate granule cells to the CA3 pyramidal neurons. The zinc-enriched MF bundle is reliably visualized using antibodies against zink-transporter- 3 (ZnT-3) (Wenzel et al., 1997). The three major MF subfields, including the hilar MFs, supra-pyramidal (SP) MFs, and intra-infra-pyramidal (IIP) MFs, were thus analyzed (see schematic representation;  Fig.  8).  The  volume  of  the  SP  MFs  was significantly increased by 45% in the LRRK2 KO group com- pared  to  the  WT  littermate  controls  (Control  0.20070.02;LRRK2 KO 0.28770.01; p ¼ 0.008). The volume of the IIP MFs was larger in LRRK2 KO mice compared to WT littermatecontrols,  but  did  not  reach  significance  level  (Control0.04870.003; LRRK2 KO 0.05670.002; p ¼ 0.066). No significant differences between both groups were found in the volume ofthe  hilar  MFs  (Control  0.16270.02;  LRRK2  KO  0.14370.01;p ¼ 0318). Volumes are represented in mm3 Â 10À9. By normal- izing volumes of the SP MFs and IIP MFs to that of the DGboth volumes were significantly increased in the LRRK2 KO group compared to WT littermate controls (SP MFs: Control0.5370.04; LRRK2 KO 0.7570.05; p ¼ 0.012; Fig. 9A; IIP MFs: Control 0.1170.005; LRRK2 KO 0.1470.007; p ¼ 0.004; Fig. 9B). However,  the  normalized  volume  of  the  hilar  MFs  wasconsistently  unchanged  between  both  groups  (Hilar  MFs:Control  0.3670.03;  LRRK2  KO  0.3770.02;  p ¼ 0.73;  Fig.  9C). Representative images illustrate the morphology of the MFbundle on anterior and posterior coronal sections (Fig. 9 D–G). A comparison of the intensity of the hilar MFs did not reveal a significant  difference  between  LRRK2  KO  mice  and  WT littermate controls (data not shown). This result indicates that LRRK2 deficiency predominantly affects the size of the SP MFs, and to a lesser extent the IIP MFs as well."
28582935	LRRK2 interactome analysis in Swiss 3T3 fibroblasts The endogenous expression of active LRRK2 in the Swiss 3T3 fibro-blast cell line has been shown by others (Nichols et al., 2009). For quan- titative interactome analysis, we immunoprecipitated endogenous LRRK2 from SILAC-labeled 3T3 fibroblasts and identified interacting proteins by liquid chromatography followed by tandem mass spec- trometry (n=4 biological replicates per group). Both lysine- and arginine-containing peptideswere isotopically labeled with an efficien- cy of approximately 92%. Importantly, short-term treatment of the heavy-labeled 3T3 cells with the highly selective LRRK2 inhibitor LRRK2-IN1 (3 μM, 90 min) (Deng et al., 2011) before immuno- precipitation caused a significant, 18-fold increase in LRRK2 binding to tubulin-beta-2 (normalized Heavy to Light Ratio: 17.9±1.6; pb0.02). The pharmacological inhibition of LRRK2 kinase activity in 3T3 cells was confirmed by a decline in LRRK2(S935) phosphorylation (Dzamko et al., 2010) detectable both bymass spectrometry and immu- noblotting (Supplementary Fig. 1).In order to confirm the kinase activity-dependent LRRK2-tubulininteraction within living cells, we transiently expressed either RFP-tagged Tubulin or RFP-tagged MAP4 by using BacMam gene de- livery in HEK293 cells overexpressing GFP-tagged LRRK2. As shown in Fig. 1, the GFP-to-RFP FRET signal from both microtubule- associated fusion proteins increased significantly (pb0.05) when cells were treated with LRRK2-IN1 (3 μM, 90 min). Similar results were obtained by using the structurally-different, less selective LRRK2 inhibitor sunitinib (not shown) (Nichols et al., 2009). The 2- to 3-fold assay windows observed here were obtained in an unoptimized assay format where cell-background-specific effects and the role of endogenous tubulin (which is abundant and non- RFP-tagged) could influence the FRET signal. Previous studies demonstrated that the inhibition of GFP-taggedLRRK2 using thenonselective LRRK2 inhibitorH-1152 induces the accu- mulation of LRRK2 in cytoplasmic fibrillar aggregates that partially colocalized with tubulin immunoreactivity (Dzamko et al., 2010). In the present study, heterogeneous expression of GFP-tagged LRRK2 in stably transfected HEK293 cells was detected and the aggregates of GFP-LRRK2 were already visible in control cells expressing high levels of LRRK2 (Supplementary Fig. 2). After treatmentwith LRRK2-IN1 cyto- plasmicGFP-LRRK2 accumulatedintofibrillar structures insome cells as described by others (Deng et al., 2011). After colchicine treatment GFP-LRRK2 accumulated in the cell periphery (Supplementary Fig. 2). Overall, the expression and localization of GFP-tagged LRRK2 in overexpressing HEK293 cells were too heterogeneous for quantitative digital image analysis.LRRK2(S935) phosphorylation is decreased by microtubule destabilizing drugsSince the pharmacological inhibition of LRRK2 kinase activity promotes its binding to tubulin in cells (shown above),we testedwhether themicrotubule cytoskeleton might influence LRRK2 kinase activity as shown for other kinases (Archambault et al., 2008; Toya et al., 2011). For medium-throughput compound testing we established a cellular assay for LRRK2(S935) phosphorylation based on LanthaScreen time- resolved FRET technology. Two distinct microtubule destabilizing agents, colchicine and vinblastine (Jordan andWilson, 2004),were test- ed in this assay format and a rapid, dose-dependent signal decrease by approximately 40% was observed (Figs. 2A, B), whereas complete de- phosphorylation was detected after LRRK2-IN-1 treatment (Fig. 2C). This effect was reproduced in mouse primary fibroblasts treated with 1 μM colchicine for 90 min and immunoblotted for endogenous phospho-LRRK2(S935) (decrease by 42.0%±11.1%, n=6, pb0.05) (Fig. 2G). By contrast, neither the microtubule stabilizing drug taxol nor the actin depolymerizing agent Latrunculin A (Spector et al., 1989)af- fected LRRK2(S935) phosphorylation when tested in a broad concen- tration range in our cellular FRET assay (Figs. 2D, E). By microscopical inspection shortly before the cell lysis, the colchicine-treated fibroblasts appeared indistinguishable from the vehicle-treated control cultures. Moreover, total LRRK2 immunoreactive bands, phospho-ERK1/2 immunoreactive bands, and MemCode-stained protein bands did not decline on immunoblots of the colchicine-treated cells speaking against an unspecific cytotoxic effect (Fig. 2G). By testing cantharidinand cantharidic acid in our FRET assay, we identified protein phos- phatase 2A as a potent LRRK2(S935) phosphatase (Fig. 2F).Recombinant LRRK2 GTPase activity is increased by co-incubation with microtubulesLRRK2 and dynamin are members of a class of G proteins that areregulatedbyhomodimerization (Gasper et al., 2009). Since the GTPase activity of dynamin is stimulated to high levels by binding to microtu- bules in vitro (Binns et al., 1999; Shpetner and Vallee, 1992), we performed similar GTPase assays by using recombinant full-length LRRK2 (Gillardon, 2009a). LRRK2 was co-incubated with taxol- stabilized microtubules, cold-treated microtubules, or microtubule- depleted assembly buffer. The hydrolysis of [α-33P]GTP was analyzed by thin layer chromatography. Microtubule preparations alone did not exhibit significant GTPase activity under these assay conditions. In two independent experiments however, LRRK2 co-incubationwithmi- crotubules lead to a significant (pb0.05, t-test), 2-fold increase in GTPase activity compared to LRRK2 only (Fig. 2H). Collectively, these data provide strong evidence for LRRK2-tubulininteraction and support the hypothesis that microtubules may act as a scaffold for LRRK2 structural organization and emanating enzymatic activity.Cell migration is affected in LRRK2(G2019S) human fibroblasts The microtubule cytoskeleton plays an essential role in cell migra-tion, cell division, and cell shape (Gardel et al., 2010; Parisiadou and Cai, 2010). To assess a potential influence of LRRK2 on cell migration, human primary fibroblasts were confluently plated in cell culture in- serts with a defined cell-free space of 500 μm. Fourteen hours after the removal of the culture insert, the cell-free space that had been in- vaded by migrating fibroblasts was measured. LRRK2(G2019S) mu- tant fibroblasts showed a trend (p>0.05) towards an enhanced migration (Fig. 3) (remaining cell-free space: G2019S 38.4%±4.5%; Control 47.0%±4.7%). Three different LRRK2(G2019S) and four dif- ferent healthy donor fibroblast lines were used. Four biological repli- cates per cell line were analyzed. Additionally, cell size, cell shape (perimeter, circularity, aspect ratio), and cell spreading did not signif- icantly differ between mutant and control fibroblasts. Similar LRRK2protein levels were detected in mutant and wildtype human fibro- blasts by immunoblotting (Fig. 3).Lesioning-induced cell migration is enhanced in LRRK2(R1441G) mouse fibroblastsNext we investigated the influence of LRRK2 on themigration of primary fibroblasts when the cell layer is damaged by a mechanical scratch, a well established cell culture model of wound healing (Larson et al., 2010). To assess a more homogenous cell population, we performed the scratch assay by using dermal fibroblasts isolated from LRRK2(R1441G) transgenic mice (Li et al., 2009)and their wildtype littermates. Consistent with our findings in human fibroblast cultures,mousefibroblasts carrying thePD-linked LRRK2(R1441G)mu- tation showed a significantly (pb0.005) enhanced invasion of the cell-free space (Fig. 4) (remaining cell-free space: Wildtype 21.5%± 2.4%; R1441G 10.4%±1.9%). In contrast, the lesion-induced migration of fibroblasts from LRRK2 knockout mice was significantly (pb0.05) slower compared to the corresponding wildtype mice (remaining cell-free space: wildtype 24.4%±4.1%; knockout 37.0%±4.1%). In all experiments, the fibroblasts were isolated from 3 individual mice per genotype, andat least 3 biological replicates eachwere tested. The effect size of LRRK2mutation/deficiency on fibroblast migration in the scratch assay is comparable to other gene mutations that are known to affect themicrotubule cytoskeleton (Francis et al., 2011; Larson et al., 2010). Treatment of mouse fibroblasts with the highly selective LRRK2inhibitor LRRK2-IN1 slowed down cellmigration in LRRK2 express- ing fibroblasts, but not in LRRK2-deficient fibroblasts clearly indi- cating that LRRK2 influences fibroblast motility (Fig. 4E). LRRK2- IN1 inhibits MAPK7 and DCLK1 at higher concentrations (Deng et al., 2011) which might contribute to its effects on cell migration. However, our gene chip database indicates that neither MAPK7 nor DCLK1 is expressed in the skin samples or fibroblast cultures further supporting a role of LRRK2 in fibroblast migration. LRRK2- IN1 completely blocked the phosphorylation of LRRK2 at Ser-910 and Ser-935 (Fig. 4F) indicating the pharmacological inhibition of LRRK2 kinase activity (Dzamko et al., 2010). Total LRRK2 protein levels in dermal fibroblasts of LRRK2(R1441G) transgenic mice did not significantly differ from the wildtype controls (111%±8%, n=7, p=0.2) as detected by immunoblotting by using a monoclo- nal antibody (MJFF c41-2) that recognizes both human and endog- enous mouse LRRK2 (Fig. 4F). Immunoblotting using a monoclonal antibody (MJFF c81-8) that preferentially recognizes human LRRK2 confirmed the expression of human LRRK2(R1441G) in primary fi- broblasts from transgenic mice. Since cell adhesion is an essential factor influencing cellmigration, a standard cell adhesion assay was performed (Guo et al., 2006). The number of fibroblasts that were adherent at different time points after seeding andwashing did not differ between the genotypes demonstrat- ing that LRRK2 does not influence cell adhesion (Supplementary Fig. 3). Similarly, cell size, cell shape (perimeter, circularity, aspect ratio), and cell spreading did not significantly differ between the genotypes. Final- ly, an Alamar blue assaywas performed to assure that differences in fi- broblast migration are not due to alterations in cell viability or proliferation rate. Mutant and wildtype fibroblasts did not show any differences in this assay over 24 h (data not shown)."
28582938	LRRK2R1441G mice do not have deficient gross motor ambulatory functionTotal ambulatory function was measured in an open field apparatus as described when mice were 16 months of age. During the 20 min tracking period, LRRK2R1441G mice covered the same distance as wild type mice (Figure 2A). Beam coordinate pairs were used to determine the relative time each mouse spent at a point in the apparatus. As expected, wild type mice spent significant time exploring the corners of the open field apparatus. This behavior was not notably different in LRRK2R1441G tg mice (Figure 2B). LRRK2R1441G tg mice also did not differ from wild type in the number of dwells (defined as a stationary period ≥ 1 sec) or the duration of dwells (Figure 2C and D). Gait analysis was performed to ascertain differences in step behavior. LRRK2R1441G tg and wild type mice had similar stride number and length (Figure 2E and F). All mice covered the same distance during this measurement (Figure 2G).LRRK2R1441G tg mice have deficient motor coordination which is reversed by diapocyninAfter 16 months of treatment with diapocynin, mice were sacrificed and brain sections were stained for TH to indicate presence or absence of dopaminergic neurons. TH staining in the substantia nigra (Figure 3D–G) did not differ between wild type and LRRK2R1441G tg mice as expected based on previous findings [18]. Long term treatment with diapocynin did not alter TH expression in either genotype. Diapocynin did not alter total open field movement in either genotype as expected based on the findings discussed in the above section (Figure 3H). Rearing in the open field apparatus was also measured, and showed no difference with diapocynin treatment in either genotype (Figure 3I).Early symptoms of PD include decreases in motor coordination. Because we saw no changes in gross motor function, we next examined changes in two indices of motor coordination: the pole test and the Rotor-Rod. In the pole test (Video Still and Supplemental Video 1), LRRK2R1441G tg mice performed markedly poorer than wild type mice. This is evident in both an increased time to turn and time to descend the pole. LRRK2R1441G tg mice were also noted to have slower engagement of their tail on the pole, and frequently dragged their hind paws while descending. With diapocynin treatment, LRRK2R1441G tg mice showed improvement on the pole test, matching the speed of wild type mice.Mice were also assessed for their ability to balance on a moving Rotor-Rod apparatus. As shown in Figure 3J, LRRK2R1441G tg mice had a markedly decreased latency to fall, indicating an inability to maintain balance on the rod. While long-term diapocynin treatment did not impact the function of wild type animals, the performance of LRRK2R1441G mice returned to normal with this treatment."
28582939	Identification of LRRK2 in exosomesLRRK2 action in the endocytic pathway may include aspects of lysosomal and autophagy-mediated degradation, receptor recycling, and vesicle budding. Evidence of LRRK2 association with MVBs, the obligate source of exosomes, was observed previously (16). Our past studies demonstrated that the highest expression of endogenous LRRK2 in mice is in the kidney (13), and the kidneys are known to secrete high quantities of exosomes into urine. To test whether LRRK2 can be secreted in urinary exosomes, we isolated a 100K × g pellet (P100) into lysis buffer together with an equivalent-volume concentrated supernatant from healthy human subjects and measured the LRRK2 protein content via western blot (Fig. 1A). LRRK2 was present at an approximate concentration of 1 pg/ml of urine, and all of the LRRK2 protein localized to the P100 (exosome) fraction. Exosomes are organelles that maintain the orientation of the proteins from the parental cells, so that extracellular proteins or extracellular protein domains remain extra-exosomal, whereas cell cytosolic proteins are encapsulated within the exosome (31). A trypsin-sensitivity assay demonstrated that the addition of triton-X 100 detergent to break the vesicles was required for proteolytic digestion of LRRK2, suggesting that LRRK2 is localized within exosomes (Fig. 1B). The LRRK2 binding partner 14-3-3 was also sensitive to trypsin degradation in the presence of a detergent. In contrast, CD9 is known to be present in a large trans-luminal protein complex within the plasma membrane that was resistant to trypsin digestion whether or not the detergent was added.Next, the P100 fraction was separated on an iodixanol density gradient and LRRK2 was found to float in the same fraction as the canonical exosome proteins Alix and TSG101 (Fig. 1C), suggesting that LRRK2 specifically resides within exosomes. CD9 is a transmembrane protein that is abundant in plasma membrane-derived vesicles that traffic to MVBs (32,33). We found that CD9 diffusely spreads across the high-density fractions, with the highest concentration in the exosome-containing fraction. Under native (non-crosslinked or dehydrated) conditions, the exosomes were perfectly spherical with intra-exosome puncta composing a dense vesicle core, as visualized using cryo-electron microscopy (EM, Fig. 1D). We localized LRRK2 immunoreactivity to isolated exosomes using a super-resolution technique (stimulated emission depletion microscopy) and found structures also of ~100 nm in size with LRRK2 protein primarily concentrated in the exosome core (Fig. 1E). CD9 has been previously used in fluorescent and immunoaffinity approaches to purify exosomes, but we found complete exclusion of LRRK2 immunoreactivity in CD9-positive exosomes via immunofluorescence in dilute exosome preparations (Fig. 1F). In contrast, LRRK2 partially co-localized to TSG101-enriched exosomes, although examples of TSG101-positive exosomes with weak or no detectable LRRK2 expression could also be observed. As CD9 is a ubiquitously expressed plasma membrane protein, this could indicate that the intracellular source of LRRK2-positive exosomes could be distinct from plasma membrane-derived exosomes.Both LRRK2 dimerization and phosphorylation are activities that have been linked to LRRK2 kinase activity (34,35). To assess LRRK2 dimerization, urinary exosomes were resuspended in buffer containing the non-ionic detergent triton X-100 and lysates analyzed by native-PAGE (Fig. 1G). Urinary exosome LRRK2 migration was identical to that of endogenous and kinase-active LRRK2 isolated from cell cytosols (34). Low amounts of LRRK2 in preparations without detergent treatment were likely due to exosome breakage during processing, but show that the detergent did not alter the migration pattern of LRRK2 in native gels. To measure LRRK2 phosphorylation, 10 µg of total protein from exosomes was compared with 10 µg of total protein isolated from low-post-mortem interval human brain cerebral cortex (brain samples described previously for LRRK2 expression (36)), together with 1 ng of recombinant LRRK2 protein derived from HEK-293T cells (Fig. 1H). The recombinant protein is known to be heavily phosphorylated at serine 935 (pS935) (10). pS935 levels were comparable between recombinant kinase-active LRRK2 and urinary exosome-derived LRRK2. In comparison, much lower levels of total and pS935 LRRK2 were detected in human brain.These results demonstrate LRRK2 can be readily measured from urinary exosomes, and that LRRK2 protein in exosomes derives from the cell cytosol, either captured in vesicles that fuse with MVBs, or packaged during the inward internalization of vesicles fusing with MVBs. Although LRRK2 protein concentration is appreciable in urinary exosomes, the overall levels are not sufficient to directly assess LRRK2 kinase activity with any described kinase activity assay.Localization of LRRK2 to kidney luminal tubule cells and characterization of urinary exosome proteomesThe sources of urinary exosomes are not fully understood, although the kidney is thought to be the major contributor (37). Staining for LRRK2 in healthy rat kidneys revealed intense LRRK2 expression in virtually all segments of the outer and inner collecting duct epithelium, with reactive cells directly abutting luminal spaces (Fig. 2A). In contrast, rat LRRK2 KO kidneys are non-reactive under identical staining conditions, albeit with minor nonspecific reactivity observed in a subset of nuclei (Fig. 2B). Since the collecting duct epithelium cells specifically are hypothesized to be contributors toward the urinary exosome pool, these results explain in part the source of LRRK2 in urinary exosomes. It is possible that LRRK2 protein interactors in exosomes may chaperone and control LRRK2 vesicular association. Although several urinary exosome proteomic studies have been performed, these have been qualitative assessments that have not capitalized on recent and dramatic improvements in the proteomic technology. To quantitatively measure the exosome proteome, urinary exosomes were pooled from six healthy controls, and the resultant exosomes were split into six equal fractions that were labeled with tandem isobaric mass tags and analyzed by long-column multi-dimensional protein identification (TMT-MudPIT). Five two hundred and sixty-eight peptides were identified and quantifiable that corresponds to 1673 protein identifications (Supplementary Material, Database 1). Of the 1673 proteins, 965 mapped to unique GeneGO objects with assigned function, and the GO process ‘cellular component organization’ was significantly enriched, owing to the high concentration of components of the actin cytoskeleton and known vesicle components [false discovery rate (FDR)-adjusted P = 5.2 × 10−41]. A number of proteins associated with neurodegenerative diseases were identified in exosomes besides LRRK2, such as DJ-1, ApoE and Nerprelysin. LRRK2-interacting proteins, including 14-3-3ɛ (Supplementary Material, Fig. S1), HSP70/90, ezrin/moesin/ radixin, and Rab7, were all identified at levels comparable with the most abundant exosome proteins (Fig. 2C). Despite previous studies that indicate some of these interactors as potential kinase substrates, we were unable to show that LRRK2 could phosphorylate any proteins from exosome lysates (Supplementary Material, Fig. S2).Among the urinary exosome proteins detected, several highly expressed proteins were identified that are considered exclusive or highly enriched in organs other than the kidney (38). These organs include prostate, stomach, pancreas, liver and colon (Fig. 2D), where LRRK2 expression of differing levels can also be detected (13). Notably, we did not obtain any evidence that brain specific proteins were present in urinary exosomes. Thus, it is possible that LRRK2 protein in urinary exosomes originate from these organs, in addition to the kidney.14-3-3 Binding to LRRK2 controls LRRK2 exosome releaseWe and others have found that LRRK2 may be tightly bound to heat-shock proteins and 14-3-3 chaperones that may control LRRK2 solubility and oligomerization (10,30,39,40). We sought to test whether interactions with these proteins may control LRRK2 extracellular secretion. First, we determined that HEK-293T cells transfected with LRRK2 actively secrete exosomes into cell culture media (Fig. 3A). While knockdown of all 14-3-3 isoforms in HEK-293T cells is difficult to accomplish, a short-peptide inhibitor known as difopein has been developed in HEK-293T cells that effectively acts as a pan 14-3-3 inhibitor by blocking 14-3-3 dimerization (41). Transfection of difopein in LRRK2-expressing HEK-293T cells resulted in a very efficient ablation of LRRK2 binding to 14-3-3 proteins, as observed through immunoprecipitation assays using a pan-14-3-3 antibody (Fig. 3B). In cells expressing both LRRK2 and difopein, LRRK2 could no longer be detected in resultant exosome fractions, yet cytosolic levels of LRRK2 and 14-3-3 (pan) remained unaltered. Likewise, difopein treatment did not have any significant effects on total exosome release, indicating 14-3-3 proteins are dispensable for exosome biogenesis and processing.Acute LRRK2 kinase inhibition via small molecules causes a reduction in 14-3-3 binding to LRRK2 (30). To test whether acute kinase inhibition-mediated loss of 14-3-3 binding would also disrupt LRRK2 release in exosomes, we first characterized the two most potent and specific LRRK2 kinase inhibitors described. HG-10-102 (42), that is known to be a selective LRRK2 inhibitor, and the widely utilized L2in1 compound (35), were first defined for potency in a kinase inhibition assay measuring LRRK2 autophosphorylation in vitro (Fig. 3C,D). When applied to HEK-293T cells at 1 µm concentration, these two compounds had comparable effects in reducing 14-3-3 (pan) binding to LRRK2 and reducing LRRK2 release in exosomes (Fig. 3E). Unexpectedly, treatment with L2in1, a known inhibitor of ERK5, and possibly Aurora A and CHK2, also blocked overall exosome release in HEK-293T cells, as determined by lower levels of TSG101 (Fig. 3E) and other markers evaluated such as Alix and CD9. Over expression of 14-3-3ɛ, the most abundant 14-3-3 isoform identified in urinary exosomes (Supplementary Material, Fig. and Database 1), restored 14-3-3 binding to LRRK2 and exosome release (Fig. 3E).The cytosolic distribution of LRRK2 may be important for LRRK2 packaging into exosomes. Using immunofluorescence localization in HEK-293T cells over-expressing LRRK2 protein, we observe a diffuse yet punctate cytoplasmic localization of LRRK2 Figure 4A). In cells co-expressing the small peptide difopein, LRRK2 redistributes to concentrated perinuclear structures (Fig. 4C), whereas exposure to LRRK2 kinase inhibitors renders LRRK2 to skein-like structures (Fig. 4E,F), consistent with previous reports evaluating L2in1 exposures (30). We found that 14-3-3ɛ over expression rescued the normal localization of LRRK2 (Fig. 4G,H). These results demonstrate how 14-3-3 binding to LRRK2 alters subcellular localization, where diffuse cytoplasmic distribution correlates to extracellular secretion.Because LRRK2 cytoplasmic distribution appears to critically mediate extracellular secretion, we next co-localized LRRK2 with the exosome marker TSG101 in HEK-293T cells that constitutively secrete exosomes. While TSG101 had a discrete vesicular-like distribution, LRRK2 was more evenly expressed across the cytosol with rarer examples of discrete vesicle-sized puncta, clearly distinguishing LRRK2 from a canonical vesicular protein (Fig. 5A). Some previous evidence suggests that the G2019S mutation may alter this cytoplasmic distribution to LRRK2-positive intracellular puncta, so we tested whether this mutation affects LRRK2 secretion. Neither G2019S nor a kinase-inactivating mutation altered overall LRRK2 secretion (Fig. 5B). These results are also consistent with past data that these alterations in LRRK2 do not affect binding to 14-3-3 proteins (39). The other protein linked to autosomal-dominant PD, α-synuclein, can also be secreted in exosomes (43). To determine whether LRRK2 may co-exist in the same exosomes as α-synuclein, we transiently co-expressed both proteins in HEK-293T cells, isolated exosomes, and analyzed the composition of the structures by immunofluorescence. No examples of co-localized exosomes were observed, suggesting that α-synuclein and LRRK2 may derive from exosomes of divergent origin. (Fig. 5C). α-Synuclein is also a binding partner for 14-3-3 isoforms, although the α-synuclein complex in exosomes has not been described.Quantification of LRRK2 in clinical exosome samplesWe collected a cohort of late-onset PD without a family history of disease (n = 20) and age-matched control samples (n = 15) from the Movement Disorder Clinic at the University of Alabama at Birmingham, following informed consent and institutional approval, and measured LRRK2 and 14-3-3(pan) expression relative to the canonical exosome marker TSG101. Age between the PD and control cohort was similar at 62.8 ± 9.4 and 62.5 ± 13.1, respectively, and the modified Hoehn and Yahr score of the PD group was 2.2 ± 0.38.We found that both LRRK2 and 14-3-3(pan) had unexpectedly high variability in both controls and PD, as LRRK2 levels varied in the PD affected group by over two orders of magnitude, in contrast to TSG101 that showed lower variability (Fig. 6A). After exclusion of outliers from the series (identified with at least one order of magnitude above or below the population average), there were no significant differences in the expression of LRRK2 or 14-3-3 in PD versus controls (P > 0.1, Fig. 6B and C), nor did LRRK2 expression correlate well with 14-3-3 (pan) expression (Fig. 6D). There were no effects of age or gender on LRRK2 or 14-3-3 expression in urinary exosomes. High levels of LRRK2 in exosomes, more than 50-fold above the cohort average, were detected in one PD-affected subject (Fig. 6E). This subject had normal quantities of exosomes in urine and had typical late-onset PD, and we did not identify a clinical cause for these extreme levels of LRRK2 (Fig. 6F). To determine whether LRRK2 expression in urine changes over time, we collected urine from healthy control subjects over the course of a week at different times of the day and found that LRRK2 levels did not significantly vary within this period of time (Fig. 6F shows one such subject, one-way ANOVA P > 0.5). These data demonstrate the relative ease of collection and measurement of LRRK2 in clinical samples, but the data emphasize the importance of baseline measures of LRRK2 expression due to extreme inter-sample variability.LRRK2 exosomes secreted by macrophagesAs opposed to constitutive exosome secretion in active neurons and HEK-293T cells, other cells, such as macrophages, have been described with strong acute regulation of exosome release (44). We and others have found that activated macrophages of the periphery and brain express high levels of LRRK2 protein that can be induced with stimulation (11,12,45). Upon lipopolysaccharide (LPS) stimulation of RAW 264.7 macrophage cell line that express endogenous LRRK2 protein, we find that the exosome-associated protein TSG101 nearly evacuates from the cell cytosol, and abundant exosomes were released that contained high levels of LRRK2 expression (Fig. 7A). Thus, past-assessments of the magnitude of LRRK2 induction in macrophages would be underestimates if extracellular LRRK2 were not measured. To confirm and expand on these results, we isolated into culture primary macrophages from the mouse peritoneum of LRRK2 transgenic mice that express mouse WT-LRRK2 or G2019S-LRRK2 from BAC transgenes. Stimulation of these cells with LPS resulted in abundant LRRK2 secretion, but again the G2019S-mutation had no effect on the total quantity of LRRK2 released (Fig. 7B and C).Due to the high levels of LRRK2 expressed in primary macrophages, immunofluorescence becomes possible. While LPS had a striking effect on overall macrophage morphology from a polarized cell into an amoeboid body, a more modest perinuclear accumulation of LRRK2 and the remaining TSG101 could be observed (Fig. 7D). We did not notice an enhanced co-localization between LRRK2 and TSG101 after stimulation, suggesting that LRRK2 vesicular association is probably independent of stimulation, but overt release is critically modified by stimulation. Macrophage-derived exosomes provide an example of how LRRK2 exosome release can be physiologically regulated.LRRK2 exosomes in CSF and secretion by neuronsIn the brain, serial sectioning confirmed that the most intense LRRK2 staining was in the striatum, and many of the LRRK2-positive cells were grouped into patches resembling striosomes juxtaposed against the lateral ventricles (Fig. 8A). We rationalized that LRRK2 may be secreted into the CSF from these neurons and other LRRK2-positive cells in the brain. Two samples of CSF were prepared from control subjects and exosomes verified using cryo-EM (Fig. 8B). LRRK2 expression was determined at a concentration of ~10 pg/ml of CSF in these samples (Fig. 8C). To test whether pathogenic LRRK2 mutations affect neuronal LRRK2 exosome secretion, viral transduction of cultured neurons resulted in high levels of LRRK2 in exosomes, but these levels did not vary due to the presence of pathogenic mutations (Fig. 8D,E). Within neurons, LRRK2 occasionally localized with TSG101-positive vesicles, particularly in dendrites (Fig. 8F). As neurons have been previously described as major sources of exosomes in the brain (46, 47), it seems likely that the source of LRRK2-positive exosomes in the CSF derives from neurons expressing LRRK2."
28582940	Decreased Locomotor Activity in LRRK2R1441G Tg Aged Mice  As motor symptoms are considered the hallmark of PD in human patients, we first identified the onset of motor disabilities in LRRK2R1441G mice. Tg and NTg (non-transgenic) littermates coming from several litters were exposed to different tasks measuring locomotion, vertical activity, balance and coordination. Compared to their age- and gender-matched controls, Tg mice displayed subtle motor deficits only after the age of 16 months, though no gross dysfunction could be observed. Indeed, in the standard cylinder test, both groups of mice reared the same number of time within the 5 min session from 4 to 16 months old, but at twenty months old, Tg mice reared much less than their controls NTg (Welch’s t test, t(6.036) = 2.783, p<0.05, Figure 1A). Tg mice were still well coordinated in their movements as they performed as good as their controls in the accelerated rotarod (Figure 1B). In order to check any decrease of limb muscular tonus that could be responsible for the decreased vertical ability observed in the cylinder test, we measured the ability of the mice to remain clinging to an inverted cage lid (grip strength test, Figure 1C). No difference between Tg and NTg could be found concerning the mean latency until they fall from the elevated cage lid, showing that both groups had similar muscular tonus capacity and grip strength at this age.  To measure the spontaneous activity, mice were put in the open field apparatus during 15 min (Photobeam Activity System, PAS-Open Field, San Diego Instrument, USA). Horizontal and vertical activity was automatically recorded as well as the fine activity, which combined actions like grooming, exploration on four limbs and sniffing. We first considered the total amount of activity within the 15 min test (Figure 1D). In general, mice increased their activity at 9 months old, but decreased it by half at 16 months old (Age effect with MANOVA with “age” and “genotype” as in-between subject factors, Vertical activity: F(6,131) = 7.066, p<0.001; Horizontal activity: F(6,131) = 6.123, p<0.001). These changes were statistically significant only for Tg animals (Genotype effect with MANOVA with “age” and “genotype” as in-between subject factors, Vertical activity: n.s.; Horizontal activity: F(1,131) = 4.622, p<0.05; followed by post-hoc comparisons, Figure 1Da and 1Db). From 16 months old, Tg mice were constantly less active than NTg controls, with a significant difference reached at 20 months old (Welch’s t test, t(8.975) = 8.646, p<0.05). A similar profile of activity was observed over time concerning the amount of photobeam activity in the center (MANOVA with “age” and “genotype” as in-between subject factors, Age effect: F(6,131) = 5.239, p<0.001, Genotype effect: n.s., Figure 1Dc), and from 16 months old, the Tg mice spent significantly less time than the controls in the center (Welch’s t test p<0.05 at 16 and 20 months old, with t(11.805) = 5.418 and t(7.550) = 6.143 respectively).  In summary, Tg animals decreased their activity in the open field compared to NTg littermate controls after the age of 16 months old. This was not compensated by an augmentation of fine behaviors. Indeed, although 16 months old Tg mice increased their fine activities compared to NTg (p<0.05, Figure 1Dd), the photobeam activity reflecting the number of fine behaviors were not changed otherwise, suggesting that Tg mice displayed an overall diminution of locomotor activity only.  We further compared the activity of both groups according to intervals of 3 min time per 15 min session (Figure 2). While the overall activity curves of the mice were similar for both NTg and Tg before one year old, Tg animals showed constantly less horizontal ambulation and rearing behaviors than NTg mice from 16 months old (MANOVA with “genotype” and “3-min-intervals” as in-between subject factors, main effect of the genotype in Horizontal activity at 16 months old: F(1,74) = 14.233, p<0.001, 20 months old F(1,54) = 24.032, p<0.001; and in Vertical activity at 16 months old F(1,74) = 7.811, p<0.01 and 20 months old F(1,54) = 8.565, p<0.01). As previously shown, Tg mice increased their fine movements at 16 months old compared to their NTg littermates (MANOVA with “genotype” and “3-min-intervals” as in-between subject factors, main effect of the genotype: F(1,74) = 10.118, p<0.01). This resting behavior was however not different at older ages, and thus cannot compensate the general decreased activity observed. Also, this analysis confirmed that 16 months old and older Tg mice behaved less in the center of the arena compared to controls (MANOVA with “genotype” and “3-min-intervals” as in-between subject factors, Genotype effect: 16 months old: F(1,74) = 14.617, p<0.001, 20 months old: F(1,54) = 17.874, p<0.001). The results were similar if we considered the percentage of photobeam activity over the total photobeam activity (data not shown, MANOVA with “genotype” and “3-min-intervals” as in-between subject factors, Genotype effect: 16 months old: F(1,74) = 7.678, p<0.01, 20 months old: F(1,54) = 9.375, p<0.001), suggesting that this might not reflect only a reduced locomotor capacity but rather a centrophobic response due to a possible fear of open areas. Since this can be an indicator of anxiety level, we analyzed the mice in other tasks which are sensitive to mood disorders-like behaviors.  LRRK2R1441G Mice did not Display Anxiety or Depression-like Behaviors with Age  Tg and NTg littermates were tested at 6, 14 and 19 months old in the elevated plus maze. This task measures the willingness of the mice to explore opened and closed areas and informs on the level of anxiety-like behavior of the animals in a new environment. We did not observe any tendency of Tg mice to be more anxious than the NTg (Figure 3A). The distance run was similar across ages and genotypes in this 5 min task and the time spent in the opened arms augmented regularly from 6 to 19 months old suggesting an increased exploratory behavior of all mice with age.  Mice were then tested in the tail suspension and forced swimming tests. These tests evaluate the motivation of the animals to escape from a despaired situation, and reflect the depressed state of the animal as compared to the depression-like behavior displayed by humans. Different batches of NTg and Tg mice were tested at different ages from 6 to 19 months old in both tests (Figure 3B–C). They all behaved the same, though the Tg mice were slightly more active (i.e. less immobile) than their controls from 16 months old onwards in the tail suspension test (mean immobility time at 16 months old NTg = 118.01±29.99, Tg = 85.91±18.69; at 19 months old NTg = 98.68±16.88, Tg = 60.42±14.35, ANOVA test with “age “ and “ genotype” as in-between factors, Age effect: F(4,76) = 2.539, p<0.05, Genotype effect: F(1,76) = 0.101, n.s.). This was in accordance with the increased exploratory activity found in the elevated plus maze. Similar results were obtained in the forced swimming test with a constant slight decrease of the immobility time with age, but no difference between the two genotypes (ANOVA test with “age” and “genotype” as in-between factors, Age effect: F(4,73) = 1,695, n.s., Genotype effect: F(1,73) = 0.337, n.s.).  LRRK2R1441G Mice Displayed Normal Sensory Responses at Late Ages  To determine whether the overexpression of the R1441G mutant form of human LRRK2 gene would affect sensory functions in mice, we checked olfaction abilities with the buried and the block tests, and sensitivity to pain with the formalin test. The two olfaction tests did not reveal any impairment in the ability to smell and recognize either social odors (Figure 4Aa-d) or food odor following deprivation (Figure 4Ae-f). In the block test, where mice should recognize a familiar odor in scented wooden cubes, Tg and NTg mice tested at 6 and 14 months showed the same pattern independently of their genotype. Interestingly, mice were more interested in sniffing the familiar blocks at 6 months old, whereas 14 months old mice had a preference for the unknown congener’s odors (Figure 4Ab). No difference between NTg and Tg was detected in the habituation period of the 6 first trials in contact with the blocks scented with the familiar odor of the home cage. In the buried test, 6 months old mice smelled very well the odor of the food following food deprivation, independently of the genotype. Tg mice were not impaired, and were even faster in eating the piece of food in the control trial than the NTg littermates (surface trial, mean latency to find and eat the piece of food NTg = 42.98±9.20; Tg = 23.21±10.00; Figure 4Af).  To determine if there was any pain-dependent-sensory dysfunction, we performed the formalin test. Mice were injected with 20 microl of 2.5% formalin in the right hind paw and observed for 30 min. The pain response followed a two-phase curve. The first phase occurred immediately after injection and lasted no more than 2 to 4 min; it is considered as an acute response of local pain. The second phase occurred about 10 to 15 min later corresponding to the response of the central nervous system [34]. Different batches of NTg and Tg mice were tested at 6, 9 and 21 months old. All mice showed similar pain sensitivity without any difference in both phases (Figure 4B).  LRRK2R1441G Aged Mice had Good Learning Abilities  We then asked whether the LRRK2R1441G BAC Tg mice displayed learning and memory deficits. Since the sensory function in the paw was not impaired in the formalin test, we tested mice of both genotypes in the passive avoidance task, where the mouse should learn to avoid a mild electric shock given through the grid floor by inhibiting its behavior to enter in the preferred dark compartment. Twenty-one-months old NTg and Tg mice learned similarly well the task as they increased their latency to step through the dark compartment within trials (ANOVA test with “genotype” and “trials” as in-between subjects factors, main effect of trials F(1,110) = 3.929, p<0.001). No difference could be seen between the genotypes (genotype as factor F(1,110) = 1.218, n.s., Figure 5A). The mice were retested 24 h after the last trial to check the retention memory. All the mice had a very poor performance in remembering to stay in the light box in this trial. This result might reflect impairment in long term memory abilities linked to ageing, as it was not dependent on the genotype.  LRRK2R1441G Mice Displayed Gastrointestinal Dysfunctions from 6 Months Old  Constipation is one of the major problems encountered by PD patients. We thus investigated whether the R1441G mutation in the LRRK2 gene would have an influence in the stool consistency and compared the production and water content of droppings of NTg and Tg mice at different ages. Although no statistical difference between NTg and Tg animals could be observed at any ages, the overall dropping analysis indicated that Tg mice displayed gastrointestinal problems. While the NTg mice had a constant stool consistency over their life time (ANOVA test comparison with “genotype” and “age” as factors, main Age effect for Water content: F(7,78) = 0.649, n.s.; for Dry Stool Weight: F(7,78) = 0.324, n.s.), Tg animals displayed differences in the water content and weight of dry stool collection from 6 months old, indicating gastrointestinal dysfunctions that oscillate between constipation and diarrhea (ANOVA test comparison with “genotype” and “age” as factors, Age effect for Water content F(7,67) = 2.928, p<0.05; for Dry Stool Weight F(7,67) = 3.776, p<0.01). At 6 months old, Tg mice were clearly constipated. The amount of water in their stool and the total dry stool weight was statistically lower compared to the baseline described at 2 months old. In comparison, the droppings of NTg animals contained a stable amount of water and dry stool from 2 to 9 months old (baseline at 2 months old dry stool weight: NTg = 92.81±5.37, Tg = 93.94±4.48; 6 months old: NTg = 91.18±8.07, Tg = 73.50±6.26, Figure 5B–C). As Tg mice were getting older, the amount of water in the stool increased, coming back to “normal” (at 9 and 12 months old) then higher compared to the initial baseline, with a maximum at 14 months old (Welch’s t test analysis not detailed here but shown in the graphs with *p<0.05, **p<0.01, ***p<0.001, Figure 5B–C)."
28582941	Normal number of nigral dopaminergic neurons in Parkin−/−DJ-1−/−Gpx1−/− miceTriple knockout mice bearing combined loss-of-function mutations in the PD-linked genes Parkin and DJ-1, as well as the antioxidant Gpx1 gene, were born at the expected Mendelian ratio and had no apparent differences in viability or longevity compared to wild-type mice. Because age-dependent loss of dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra is the primary pathological characteristic of PD and the cause of the motor symptoms observed in patients, we investigated whether Parkin−/−DJ-1−/−Gpx1−/−mice exhibit progressive loss of nigral neurons. Coronal brain sections were stained using an antibody specific for tyrosine hydroxylase (TH), a marker of dopamine-containing neurons, and rigorous stereological methods were used to estimate the number of dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra of mice at ages 6, 12 and 18 months. We observed statistically similar numbers of TH-immunoreactive neurons in each genotype at age 6 months (Figure 1A), 12 months (Figure 1B) and 18 months (Figure 1C). These data indicate that the number of dopaminergic neurons is not significantly altered in Parkin−/−DJ-1−/−Gpx1−/−mice.Increased striatal dopamine in Parkin−/−DJ-1−/−Gpx1−/− miceNigral dopaminergic neurons project to the dorsal striatum (caudate and putamen) and compensatory changes in dopamine levels and dopamine turnover at presynaptic terminals in the striatum have been hypothesized to occur during presymptomatic stages of PD (Bernheimer et al., 1973). We therefore investigated whether Parkin−/−DJ-1−/−Gpx1−/− mice have altered levels of striatal dopamine even with normal nigral neuron numbers. We used HPLC with electrochemical detection to measure the levels of dopamine and its metabolites DOPAC, HVA and 3-MT in the striatum of mice at ages 6, 12 and 18 months. Parkin−/−DJ-1−/− mice and mice with a single Gpx1 deficiency showed no change in striatal dopamine levels compared to wild type mice (Figure 2). Surprisingly, dopamine levels were significantly elevated in Parkin−/−DJ-1−/−Gpx1−/− mice at 18 months (p<0.05, one-way ANOVA). At earlier ages, striatal dopamine levels are not significantly different by ANOVA, however, t-test shows significant differences between wild-type and Parkin−/−DJ-1−/−Gpx1−/− mice at age 12 months (p= 0.0019) and 6 months (p=0.0475) (Figure 2). We found no significant differences in dopamine turnover, calculated as the ratio of dopamine metabolites to dopamine (data not shown). These results suggest that Parkin−/−DJ-1−/−Gpx1−/−mice have compensatory changes in striatal dopamine levels.Altered serotonin in multiple brain regions of Parkin−/−DJ-1−/− miceIn addition to showing an increase in striatal dopamine, our HPLC analysis revealed that serotonin levels are significantly increased in the striatum of Parkin−/−DJ-1−/− mice and Parkin−/−DJ-1−/−Gpx1−/− mice at age 12 months (p<0.01, one-way ANOVA) and in the striatum of Parkin−/−DJ-1−/− mice at 18 months (p<0.05, one-way ANOVA) (Figure 3). No consistent differences were observed in serotonin turnover or in the levels of 5-HIAA, the primary metabolite of serotonin (data not shown).We found no genotype-dependent differences in dopamine levels in other brain regions, such as frontal cortex and hippocampus (data not shown). However, serotonin was significantly elevated in the hippocampus of Parkin−/−DJ-1−/− mice compared to wild type (p<0.05, one-way ANOVA) (Figure 4A). Deletion of both Parkin and DJ-1 is evidently required for the increased hippocampal serotonin because single knockout mice were not different from wild type (Figure 4A).One possible cause of the observed increase in hippocampal serotonin levels is an increase in serotonergic projections to the hippocampus. Therefore, we quantified serotonin-releasing fibers, defined as axons immunoreactive for the serotonin transporter (SERT) in the hippocampus, by stereological analysis. The estimated summed length of all serotonergic fibers in the hippocampus was calculated. Although there was a trend towards increased SERT-positive fibers in the hippocampus of DJ-1−/− mice and Parkin−/−DJ-1−/−mice compared to both wild type and Parkin−/− mice, this difference was not statistically significant (Figure 4B). Together, these data indicate the significant effects of Parkin and DJ-1 deficiency on the regulation of non-catecholamine neurotransmitters in the brain.Improved rotarod performance of Parkin−/−DJ-1−/− miceBecause Parkinson's disease causes deficits in motor function, we investigated whether mice with combined PD-linked mutations have altered performance in established behavioral tests of motor function. Furthermore, because age is the greatest risk factor for PD, separate cohorts of mice were tested at ages 6, 12, and 18 months to assess whether motor abilities changed with age.We examined spontaneous locomotor behavior by placing mice individually in automated activity monitors and measuring spontaneous locomotor activity for two hours. As expected, locomotor activity decreases during the two-hour test as the animals acclimate to a new environment. At all three ages tested, the activity of mutant mice was indistinguishable from wild type mice (Figure 5).In addition to the locomotor test, we analyzed the behavior of mice on the rotarod test, which measures the ability of mice to stay on top of a rotating horizontal rod as the speed of rotation accelerates from 5 to 45 RPM over 5 minutes. The rotarod test has been used for many years to detect rodent neurological deficits affecting motor coordination and balance (Dunham and Miya, 1957). Separate cohorts of mice were tested at ages 6, 12 and 18 months and the latency to fall off the rotarod was analyzed by two-way repeated measures ANOVA with trial as the repeated measure. All genotypes showed increasing latency over the 8 trials, as expected. Contrary to our expectations, Parkin−/−DJ-1−/− mice and Parkin−/−DJ-1−/−Gpx1−/−mice were able to stay on the rotarod significantly longer than wild-type mice. At age 6 months, there was a trend towards increased latency to fall in Parkin−/−DJ-1−/− and Parkin−/−DJ-1−/−Gpx1−/− mice but this difference was not statistically significant (Figure 6A). However, at ages 12 and 18 months, Parkin−/−DJ-1−/− and Parkin−/−DJ-1−/−Gpx1−/− mice showed increased latency to fall compared to wild type in trials 6, 7 and 8 (p<0.05 at 12 months and p<0.001 at 18 months, two-way repeated measures ANOVA) (Figure 6B, C). There was no significant difference between wild-type and Gpx1−/− mice at any age nor was there an additive effect of Gpx1−/− to Parkin−/−DJ-1−/−. We did not observe differences in anxiety levels measured by open field or elevated plus maze, indicating that altered anxiety cannot explain the rotarod behavior differences (data not shown). These data suggest that Parkin−/−DJ-1−/− and Parkin−/−DJ-1−/−Gpx1−/− mice show age-dependent improvement in rotarod performance compared to Gpx1−/− and wild type mice.The surprising improvement in rotarod performance of Parkin−/−DJ-1−/− mice and Parkin−/−DJ-1−/−Gpx1−/− prompted us to re-examine the rotarod performance of Parkin−/− mice and DJ-1−/− mice, especially because they had been backcrossed from a hybrid to a pure C57BL/6 genetic background since our previous studies (Goldberg et al., 2003, Goldberg et al., 2005). We compared the rotarod performance of wild-type, Parkin−/−, DJ-1−/− and Parkin−/−DJ-1−/− mice in young (6 month) and aged (13 and 16 month) cohorts (Figure 7A-C). At ages 6, 13 and 16 months, Parkin−/−DJ-1−/− perform significantly better than wild type (p ≤ 0.001, two-way repeated measures ANOVA) (Figure 7B, C). Therefore, the improvement observed in Parkin−/−DJ-1−/− and Parkin−/−DJ-1−/−Gpx1−/− mice may be due to a synergistic effect of DJ-1 and Parkin deficiencies. The effect of Gpx1-deficiency on rotarod performance appears to be negligible because there is no difference in rotarod performance between Parkin−/-DJ-1−/− and Parkin−/−DJ-1−/−Gpx1−/− mice (Figure 6) and no difference in rotarod performance between wild-type mice and Gpx1−/− mice.To investigate whether the increased rotarod latencies in Parkin−/−DJ-1−/− mice were due to improved motor skills or non-motor aspects of this test, we measured the latencies of fully trained 8-month-old wild-type and mutant mice to fall off the rotarod at fixed speeds of 5, 10, 15 and 20 RPM for 5 min (Figure 8). Wild-type mice fell off the rotarod significantly faster than Parkin−/−, DJ-1−/− and Parkin−/−DJ-1−/− mice at all speeds tested, including low speeds, such as 5 and 10 RPM, that did not challenge the motor abilities of the mice. We also analyzed video recordings of mice during the fixed-speed rotarod test. It was apparent that all mice could easily perform the task at slow speeds and that the mice that fell off did so upon turning around or exploring the left or right sides of the rod rather than facing forward. An investigator blind to genotype analyzed the videos with a stopwatch and measured the time each mouse was not facing forward, which was considered “distracted” from the task, during the first 30 seconds of the fixed-speed rotarod test. We observed that at 10, 15 and 20 RPM, Parkin−/−DJ-1−/− mice spent significantly less time “distracted” on the rotarod compared to wild type mice (p<0.05-0.001, one-way ANOVA) (Figure 9A-C). At 5 RPM, the same trend was observed, likely accounting for the longer latencies to fall compared to wild-type mice (Figure 8A). Normal olfactory function in mutant miceIn order to rule out potential sensory deficits as a cause of altered rotarod behavior, we tested mice for olfactory function because one common preclinical symptom of PD is anosmia (Doty et al., 1988, Doty et al., 1992, Pellicano et al., 2007). We hypothesized that decreased olfactory function may cause Parkin−/−DJ-1−/− mice to explore less and consequently show longer latencies to fall off of the rotarod. However, we found no evidence of impaired olfactory function in mutant mice (Figure 9D). These data suggest that the improved rotarod performance of Parkin−/−DJ-1−/− mice is not attributable to a lack of olfactory distractions."
24275654	Mutations in LRRK2, encoding the multifunctional protein leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2), are a common cause of Parkinson disease. LRRK2 has been suggested to influence the cytoskeleton as LRRK2 mutants reduce neurite outgrowth and cause an accumulation of hyperphosphorylated Tau. This might cause alterations in the dynamic instability of microtubules suggested to contribute to the pathogenesis of Parkinson disease. Here, we describe a direct interaction between LRRK2 and beta-tubulin. This interaction is conferred by the LRRK2 Roc domain and is disrupted by the familial R1441G mutation and artificial Roc domain mutations that mimic autophosphorylation. LRRK2 selectively interacts with three beta-tubulin isoforms: TUBB, TUBB4, and TUBB6, one of which (TUBB4) is mutated in the movement disorder dystonia type 4 (DYT4). Binding specificity is determined by lysine 362 and alanine 364 of beta-tubulin. Molecular modeling was used to map the interaction surface to the luminal face of microtubule protofibrils in close proximity to the lysine 40 acetylation site in alpha-tubulin. This location is predicted to be poorly accessible within mature stabilized microtubules, but exposed in dynamic microtubule populations. Consistent with this finding, endogenous LRRK2 displays a preferential localization to dynamic microtubules within growth cones, rather than adjacent axonal microtubule bundles. This interaction is functionally relevant to microtubule dynamics, as mouse embryonic fibroblasts derived from LRRK2 knock-out mice display increased microtubule acetylation. Taken together, our data shed light on the nature of the LRRK2-tubulin interaction, and indicate that alterations in microtubule stability caused by changes in LRRK2 might contribute to the pathogenesis of Parkinson disease.
28582422	Mutations in LRRK2 play a critical role in both familial and sporadic Parkinson's disease (PD). Up to date, the role of LRRK2 in PD onset and progression remains largely unknown. However, experimental evidence highlights a critical role of LRRK2 in the control of vesicle trafficking that in turn may regulate different aspects of neuronal physiology. We have analyzed the role of LRRK2 in regulating dopamine receptor D1 (DRD1) and D2 (DRD2) trafficking. DRD1 and DRD2 are the most abundant dopamine receptors in the brain. They differ in structural, pharmacological and biochemical properties, as well as in localization and internalization mechanisms. Our results indicate that disease-associated mutant G2019S LRRK2 impairs DRD1 internalization, leading to an alteration in signal transduction. Moreover, the mutant forms of LRRK2 affect receptor turnover by decreasing the rate of DRD2 trafficking from the Golgi complex to the cell membrane. Collectively, our findings are consistent with the conclusion that LRRK2 influences the motility of neuronal vesicles and the neuronal receptor trafficking. These findings have important implications for the complex role that LRRK2 plays in neuronal physiology and the possible pathological mechanisms that may lead to neuronal death in PD.
23082216	Mutations in the leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) gene are a common cause of autosomal dominant familial Parkinson's disease (PD). LRRK2 encodes a multi-domain protein containing GTPase and kinase enzymatic domains. Disease-associated mutations in LRRK2 variably influence enzymatic activity with the common G2019S variant leading to enhanced kinase activity. Mutant LRRK2 induces neuronal toxicity through a kinase-dependent mechanism suggesting that kinase activity is important for mediating the pathogenic effects of LRRK2 mutations. A number of LRRK2 kinase substrates have been identified in vitro but whether they represent authentic physiological substrates in mammalian cells or tissues is not yet clear. The eukaryotic initiation factor 4E (eIF4E)-binding protein, 4E-BP1, was recently identified as a potential substrate of LRRK2 kinase activity in vitro and in Drosophila with phosphorylation occurring at Thr37 and Thr46. Here, we explore a potential interaction of LRRK2 and 4E-BP1 in mammalian cells and brain. We find that LRRK2 can weakly phosphorylate 4E-BP1 in vitro but LRRK2 overexpression is not able to alter endogenous 4E-BP1 phosphorylation in mammalian cells. In mammalian neurons LRRK2 and 4E-BP1 display minimal co-localization, whereas the subcellular distribution, protein complex formation and covalent post-translational modification of endogenous 4E-BP1 are not altered in the brains of LRRK2 knockout or mutant LRRK2 transgenic mice. In the brain, the phosphorylation of 4E-BP1 at Thr37 and Thr46 does not change in LRRK2 knockout or mutant LRRK2 transgenic mice, nor is 4E-BP1 phosphorylation altered in idiopathic or G2019S mutant PD brains. Collectively, our results suggest that 4E-BP1 is neither a major nor robust physiological substrate of LRRK2 in mammalian cells or brain.
28720718	Mutations in LRRK2, which encodes leucine-rich repeat kinase 2, are the most common genetic cause of familial and sporadic Parkinson's disease (PD), a degenerative disease of the central nervous system that causes impaired motor function and, in advanced stages, dementia. Dementia is a common symptom of another neurodegenerative disease, Alzheimer's disease, and research suggests that there may be pathophysiological and genetic links between the two diseases. Aggregates of beta amyloid [a protein produced through cleavage of amyloid precursor protein (APP)] are seen in both diseases and in PD patients carrying G2019S-mutant LRRK2. Using patient-derived cells, brain tissue, and PD model mice, we found that LRRK2 interacted with and phosphorylated APP at Thr668 within its intracellular domain (AICD). Phosphorylation of APP at Thr668 promoted AICD transcriptional activity and correlated with increased nuclear abundance of AICD and decreased abundance of a dopaminergic neuron marker in cultures and brain tissue. The AICD regulates the transcription of genes involved in cytoskeletal dynamics and apoptosis. Overexpression of AICD, but not a phosphodeficient mutant (AICDT668A), increased the loss of dopaminergic neurons in older mice expressing LRRK2G2019S Moreover, the amount of Thr668-phosphorylated APP was substantially greater in postmortem brain tissue and dopaminergic neurons (generated by reprogramming skin cells) from LRRK2G2019S patients than in those from healthy individuals. LRRK2 inhibitors reduced the phosphorylation of APP at Thr668 in the patient-derived dopaminergic neurons and in the midbrains of LRRK2G2019S mice. Thus, APP is a substrate of LRRK2, and its phosphorylation promotes AICD function and neurotoxicity in PD.
22423108	Both sporadic and autosomal dominant forms of Parkinson's disease (PD) have been causally linked to mutations in leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2), a large protein with multiple domains. The kinase domain plays an important role in LRRK2-mediated toxicity. Although a number of investigations have focused on LRRK2 kinase activity, less is known about the GTPase function of LRRK2. The activity of GTPases is regulated by GTPase activating proteins (GAPs) and GTP exchange factors. Here, we identify ArfGAP1 as the first GAP for LRRK2. ArfGAP1 binds LRRK2 predominantly via the WD40 and kinase domain of LRRK2, and it increases LRRK2 GTPase activity and regulates LRRK2 toxicity both in vitro and in vivo in Drosophila melanogaster. Unexpectedly, ArfGAP1 is an LRRK2 kinase substrate whose GAP activity is inhibited by LRRK2, whereas wild-type and G2019S LRRK2 autophosphorylation and kinase activity are significantly reduced in the presence of ArfGAP1. Overexpressed ArfGAP1 exhibits toxicity that is reduced by LRRK2 both in vitro and in vivo. Delta64-ArfGAP1, a dominant-negative ArfGAP1, and shRNA knockdown of ArfGAP1 reduce LRRK2 toxicity. Thus, LRRK2 and ArfGAP1 reciprocally regulate the activity of each other. Our results provide insight into the basic pathobiology of LRRK2 and indicate an important role for the GTPase domain and ArfGAP1 in LRRK2-mediated toxicity. These data suggest that agents targeted toward regulation of LRRK2 GTP hydrolysis might be therapeutic agents for the treatment of PD.
22357653	Mutations in the genes encoding LRRK2 and alpha-synuclein cause autosomal dominant forms of familial Parkinson's disease (PD). Fibrillar forms of alpha-synuclein are a major component of Lewy bodies, the intracytoplasmic proteinaceous inclusions that are a pathological hallmark of idiopathic and certain familial forms of PD. LRRK2 mutations cause late-onset familial PD with a clinical, neurochemical and, for the most part, neuropathological phenotype that is indistinguishable from idiopathic PD. Importantly, alpha-synuclein-positive Lewy bodies are the most common pathology identified in the brains of PD subjects harboring LRRK2 mutations. These observations may suggest that LRRK2 functions in a common pathway with alpha-synuclein to regulate its aggregation. To explore the potential pathophysiological interaction between LRRK2 and alpha-synuclein in vivo, we modulated LRRK2 expression in a well-established human A53T alpha-synuclein transgenic mouse model with transgene expression driven by the hindbrain-selective prion protein promoter. Deletion of LRRK2 or overexpression of human G2019S-LRRK2 has minimal impact on the lethal neurodegenerative phenotype that develops in A53T alpha-synuclein transgenic mice, including premature lethality, pre-symptomatic behavioral deficits and human alpha-synuclein or glial neuropathology. We also find that endogenous or human LRRK2 and A53T alpha-synuclein do not interact together to influence the number of nigrostriatal dopaminergic neurons. Taken together, our data suggest that alpha-synuclein-related pathology, which occurs predominantly in the hindbrain of this A53T alpha-synuclein mouse model, occurs largely independently from LRRK2 expression. These observations fail to provide support for a pathophysiological interaction of LRRK2 and alpha-synuclein in vivo, at least within neurons of the mouse hindbrain.
21857923	Mutation of leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) is the leading genetic cause of Parkinson's Disease (PD), manifested as age-dependent dopaminergic neurodegeneration, but the underlying molecular mechanisms remain unclear. Multiple roles of LRRK2 may contribute to dopaminergic neurodegeneration. Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress has also been linked to PD pathogenesis, but its interactive mechanism with PD genetic factors is largely unknown. Here, we used C. elegans, human neuroblastoma cells and murine cortical neurons to determine the role of LRRK2 in maintaining dopaminergic neuron viability. We found that LRRK2 acts to protect neuroblastoma cells and C. elegans dopaminergic neurons from the toxicity of 6-hydroxydopamine and/or human alpha-synuclein, possibly through the p38 pathway, by supporting upregulation of GRP78, a key cell survival molecule during ER stress. A pathogenic LRRK2 mutant (G2019S), however, caused chronic p38 activation that led to death of murine neurons and age-related dopaminergic-specific neurodegeneration in nematodes. These observations establish a critical functional link between LRRK2 and ER stress.
21698001	Parkinson's disease (PD) results from progressive degeneration of dopaminergic neurons. Most PD cases are sporadic, but some have pathogenic mutation in the individual genes. Mutation of the leucine-rich repeat kinase-2 (LRRK2) gene is associated with familial and sporadic PD, as exemplified by G2019S substitution. While constitutive expression of mutant LRRK2 in transgenic mice fails to induce neuron death, transient expression of the disease gene by viral delivery causes a substantial loss of dopaminergic neurons in mice. To further assess LRRK2 pathogenesis, we created inducible transgenic rats expressing human LRRK2 with G2019S substitution. Temporal overexpression of LRRK2(G2019S) in adult rats impaired dopamine reuptake by dopamine transporter (DAT) and thus enhanced locomotor activity, the phenotypes that were not observed in transgenic rats constitutively expressing the gene throughout life time. Reduced DAT binding activity is an early sign of dopaminergic dysfunction in asymptomatic subjects carrying pathogenic mutation in LRRK2. Our transgenic rats recapitulated the initiation process of dopaminergic dysfunction caused by pathogenic mutation in LRRK2. Inducible transgenic approach uncovered phenotypes that may be obscured by developmental compensation in constitutive transgenic rats. Finding in inducible LRRK2 transgenic rats would guide developing effective strategy in transgenic studies: Inducible expression of transgene may induce greater phenotypes than constitutive gene expression, particularly in rodents with short life time.
20949042	BACKGROUND: Dominant mutations in leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) are the most common genetic cause of Parkinson's disease, however, the underlying pathogenic mechanisms are poorly understood. Several in vitro studies have shown that the most frequent mutation, LRRK2(G2019S), increases kinase activity and impairs neuronal survival. LRRK2 has been linked to the mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase kinase family and the receptor-interacting protein kinases based on sequence similarity within the kinase domain and in vitro substrate phosphorylation. METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We used an unbiased proteomic approach to identify the kinase signaling pathways wherein LRRK2 may be active. By incubation of protein microarrays containing 260 signal transduction proteins we detected four arrayed Ste20 serine/threonine kinase family members (TAOK3, STK3, STK24, STK25) as novel LRRK2 substrates and LRRK2 interacting proteins, respectively. Moreover, we found that protein kinase C (PKC) zeta binds and phosphorylates LRRK2 both in vitro and in vivo. CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Ste20 kinases and PKC zeta contribute to neuronal Tau phosphorylation, neurite outgrowth and synaptic plasticity under physiological conditions. Our data suggest that these kinases may also be involved in synaptic dysfunction and neurite fragmentation in transgenic mice and in human PD patients carrying toxic gain-of-function LRRK2 mutations.
20659021	LRRK2 (leucine-rich repeat protein kinase 2) is mutated in a significant number of Parkinson's disease patients. Since a common mutation that replaces Gly2019 with a serine residue enhances kinase catalytic activity, small-molecule LRRK2 inhibitors might have utility in treating Parkinson's disease. However, the effectiveness of inhibitors is difficult to assess, as no physiological substrates or downstream effectors have been identified that could be exploited to develop a robust cell-based assay. We recently established that LRRK2 bound 14-3-3 protein isoforms via its phosphorylation of Ser910 and Ser935. In the present study we show that treatment of Swiss 3T3 cells or lymphoblastoid cells derived from control or a Parkinson's disease patient harbouring a homozygous LRRK2(G2019S) mutation with two structurally unrelated inhibitors of LRRK2 (H-1152 or sunitinib) induced dephosphorylation of endogenous LRRK2 at Ser910 and Ser935, thereby disrupting 14-3-3 interaction. Our results suggest that H-1152 and sunitinib induce dephosphorylation of Ser910 and Ser935 by inhibiting LRRK2 kinase activity, as these compounds failed to induce significant dephosphorylation of a drug-resistant LRRK2(A2016T) mutant. Moreover, consistent with the finding that non-14-3-3-binding mutants of LRRK2 accumulated within discrete cytoplasmic pools resembling inclusion bodies, we observed that H-1152 causes LRRK2 to accumulate within inclusion bodies. These findings indicate that dephosphorylation of Ser910/Ser935, disruption of 14-3-3 binding and/or monitoring LRRK2 cytoplasmic localization can be used as an assay to assess the relative activity of LRRK2 inhibitors in vivo. These results will aid the elaboration and evaluation of LRRK2 inhibitors. They will also stimulate further research to understand how phosphorylation of Ser910 and Ser935 is controlled by LRRK2, and establish any relationship to development of Parkinson's disease.
19890007	Leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) functions as a putative protein kinase of ezrin, radixin, and moesin (ERM) family proteins. A Parkinson's disease-related G2019S substitution in the kinase domain of LRRK2 further enhances the phosphorylation of ERM proteins. The phosphorylated ERM (pERM) proteins are restricted to the filopodia of growing neurites in which they tether filamentous actin (F-actin) to the cytoplasmic membrane and regulate the dynamics of filopodia protrusion. Here, we show that, in cultured neurons derived from LRRK2 G2019S transgenic mice, the number of pERM-positive and F-actin-enriched filopodia was significantly increased, and this correlates with the retardation of neurite outgrowth. Conversely, deletion of LRRK2, which lowered the pERM and F-actin contents in filopodia, promoted neurite outgrowth. Furthermore, inhibition of ERM phosphorylation or actin polymerization rescued the G2019S-dependent neuronal growth defects. These data support a model in which the G2019S mutation of LRRK2 causes a gain-of-function effect that perturbs the homeostasis of pERM and F-actin in sprouting neurites critical for neuronal morphogenesis.
23813973	LRRK2 G2019S mutation is the most common genetic cause of Parkinson's disease (PD). Cellular pathology caused by this mutant is associated with mitochondrial dysfunction and augmented autophagy. However, the underlying mechanism is not known. In this study, we determined whether blocking excessive mitochondrial fission could reduce cellular damage and neurodegeneration induced by the G2019S mutation. In both LRRK2 G2019S-expressing cells and PD patient fibroblasts carrying this specific mutant, treatment with P110, a selective peptide inhibitor of fission dynamin-related protein 1 (Drp1) recently developed in our lab, reduced mitochondrial fragmentation and damage, and corrected excessive autophagy. LRRK2 G2019S directly bound to and phosphorylated Drp1 at Threonine595, whereas P110 treatment abolished this phosphorylation. A site-directed mutant, Drp1(T595A), corrected mitochondrial fragmentation, improved mitochondrial mass and suppressed excessive autophagy in both cells expressing LRRK2 G2019S and PD patient fibroblasts carrying the mutant. Further, in dopaminergic neurons derived from LRRK2 G2019S PD patient-induced pluripotent stem cells, we demonstrated that either P110 treatment or expression of Drp1(T595A) reduced mitochondrial impairment, lysosomal hyperactivity and neurite shortening. Together, we propose that inhibition of Drp1-mediated excessive mitochondrial fission might be a strategy for treatment of PD relevant to LRRK2 G2019S mutation.
25446991	The G2019S leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) mutation is the most common cause of genetic Parkinson's disease (PD). However, the molecular mechanism underlying LRRK2 G2019S-induced cellular pathology is poorly understood. Here, we demonstrated that LRRK2 G2019S bound to and phosphorylated Bcl-2, a mitochondrial anti-apoptotic protein, at Threonine 56. Either stable expression of Bcl-2 or transient expression of a Bcl-2 phosphor mutant (Bcl-2(T56A)) abolished LRRK2 G2019S-induced mitochondrial depolarization and autophagy. Together, our findings reveal a previously unidentified target of LRRK2 G2019S, showing that Bcl-2 serves as a point of crosstalk between LRRK2 G2019S-mediated mitochondrial disorder and dysregulation of autophagy.
18182054	Neuritic retraction represents a prominent feature of the degenerative phenotype associated with mutations in leucine rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) that are implicated in autosomal dominant and some cases of sporadic Parkinson's disease. Alterations in macroautophagy, the vacuolar catabolism of cytoplasmic constituents, have been described in Parkinson's disease. In this study, we utilized retinoic-acid differentiated SH-SY5Y cells to determine whether autophagy contributes to mutant LRRK2-associated neurite degeneration. Transfection of pre-differentiated SH-SY5Y cells with LRRK2 cDNA containing the common G2019S mutation resulted in significant decreases in neurite length, which were not observed in cells transfected with wild type LRRK2 or its kinase-dead K1906M mutation. G2019S LRRK2 transfected cells also exhibited striking increases in autophagic vacuoles in both neuritic and somatic compartments, as demonstrated by fluorescence and western blot analysis of the autophagy marker green fluorescent protein-tagged microtubule-associated protein Light Chain 3 and by transmission electron microscopy. RNA interference knockdown of LC3 or Atg7, two essential components of the conserved autophagy machinery, reversed the effects of G2019S LRRK2 expression on neuronal process length, whereas rapamycin potentiated these effects. The mitogen activated protein kinase/extracellular signal regulated protein kinase (MAPK/ERK) kinase (MEK) inhibitor 1,4-diamino-2,3-dicyano-1,4-bis[2-aminophenylthio]butadiene (U0126) reduced LRRK2-induced neuritic autophagy and neurite shortening, implicating MAPK/ERK-related signaling. These results indicate an active role for autophagy in neurite remodeling induced by pathogenic mutation of LRRK2.
22773119	Mutations in leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) are a major cause of familial Parkinsonism, and the G2019S mutation of LRRK2 is one of the most prevalent mutations. The deregulation of autophagic processes in nerve cells is thought to be a possible cause of Parkinson's disease (PD). In this study, we observed that G2019S mutant fibroblasts exhibited higher autophagic activity levels than control fibroblasts. Elevated levels of autophagic activity can trigger cell death, and in our study, G2019S mutant cells exhibited increased apoptosis hallmarks compared to control cells. LRRK2 is able to induce the phosphorylation of MAPK/ERK kinases (MEK). The use of 1,4-diamino-2,3-dicyano-1,4-bis[2-aminophenylthio]butadiene (U0126), a highly selective inhibitor of MEK1/2, reduced the enhanced autophagy and sensibility observed in G2019S LRRK2 mutation cells. These data suggest that the G2019S mutation induces autophagy via MEK/ERK pathway and that the inhibition of this exacerbated autophagy reduces the sensitivity observed in G2019S mutant cells.
23472874	The LRRK2 mutation G2019S is the most common genetic cause of Parkinson's disease (PD). To better understand the link between mutant LRRK2 and PD pathology, we derived induced pluripotent stem cells from PD patients harboring LRRK2 G2019S and then specifically corrected the mutant LRRK2 allele. We demonstrate that gene correction resulted in phenotypic rescue in differentiated neurons and uncovered expression changes associated with LRRK2 G2019S. We found that LRRK2 G2019S induced dysregulation of CPNE8, MAP7, UHRF2, ANXA1, and CADPS2. Knockdown experiments demonstrated that four of these genes contribute to dopaminergic neurodegeneration. LRRK2 G2019S induced increased extracellular-signal-regulated kinase 1/2 (ERK) phosphorylation. Transcriptional dysregulation of CADPS2, CPNE8, and UHRF2 was dependent on ERK activity. We show that multiple PD-associated phenotypes were ameliorated by inhibition of ERK. Therefore, our results provide mechanistic insight into the pathogenesis induced by mutant LRRK2 and pointers for the development of potential new therapeutics.
19545277	Autosomal dominant mutations in leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) are the most common genetic cause of late-onset Parkinson's disease. The most prevalent LRRK2(G2019S) mutation has repeatedly been shown to enhance kinase activity and neurotoxicity, however, the molecular mechanisms leading to neurodegeneration remain poorly defined. Here we show that recombinant human LRRK2 preferentially phosphorylates tubulin-beta purified from bovine brain and that phosphorylation is three-fold enhanced by the LRRK2(G2019S) mutation. By tandem mass spectrometry, Thr107 was identified as phosphorylation site which is highly conserved between tubulin-beta family members and also between tubulin-beta genes of different species. LRRK2 was co-immunoprecipitated with tubulin-beta both from wild-type mouse brain and from LRRK2 over-expressing, non-neuronal human embryonic kidney 293 cells. However, an effect of LRRK2 on tubulin phosphorylation and assembly was only detectable in mouse brain samples. In vitro co-incubation of bovine brain tubulins with LRRK2 increased microtubule stability in the presence of microtubule-associated proteins which may explain the reduction in neurite length in LRRK2-deficient neurons in culture. These findings suggest that LRRK2(G2019S)-induced neurodegeneration in Parkinsonian brains may be partly mediated by increased phosphorylation of tubulin-beta and constraining of microtubule dynamics.
22303461	Leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2), a large protein kinase containing multi-functional domains, has been identified as the causal molecule for autosomal-dominant Parkinson's disease (PD). In the present study, we demonstrated for the first time that (i) LRRK2 interacts with tau in a tubulin-dependent manner; (ii) LRRK2 directly phosphorylates tubulin-associated tau, but not free tau; (iii) LRRK2 phosphorylates tau at Thr181 as one of the target sites; and (iv) The PD-associated LRRK2 mutations, G2019S and I2020T, elevated the degree of tau-phosphorylation. These results provide direct proof that tau is a physiological substrate for LRRK2. Furthermore, we revealed that LRRK2-mediated phosphorylation of tau reduces its tubulin-binding ability. Our results suggest that LRRK2 plays an important role as a physiological regulator for phosphorylation-mediated dissociation of tau from microtubules, which is an integral aspect of microtubule dynamics essential for neurite outgrowth and axonal transport.
26365310	In response to brain injury, microglia rapidly extend processes that isolate lesion sites and protect the brain from further injury. Here we report that microglia carrying a pathogenic mutation in the Parkinson's disease (PD)-associated gene, G2019S-LRRK2 (GS-Tg microglia), show retarded ADP-induced motility and delayed isolation of injury, compared with non-Tg microglia. Conversely, LRRK2 knockdown microglia are highly motile compared with control cells. In our functional assays, LRRK2 binds to focal adhesion kinase (FAK) and phosphorylates its Thr-X-Arg/Lys (TXR/K) motif(s), eventually attenuating FAK activity marked by decreased pY397 phosphorylation (pY397). GS-LRRK2 decreases the levels of pY397 in the brain, microglia and HEK cells. In addition, treatment with an inhibitor of LRRK2 kinase restores pY397 levels, decreased pTXR levels and rescued motility of GS-Tg microglia. These results collectively suggest that G2019S mutation of LRRK2 may contribute to the development of PD by inhibiting microglial response to brain injury.
24510904	Mutations in leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) cause inherited Parkinson disease (PD), and common variants around LRRK2 are a risk factor for sporadic PD. Using protein-protein interaction arrays, we identified BCL2-associated athanogene 5, Rab7L1 (RAB7, member RAS oncogene family-like 1), and Cyclin-G-associated kinase as binding partners of LRRK2. The latter two genes are candidate genes for risk for sporadic PD identified by genome-wide association studies. These proteins form a complex that promotes clearance of Golgi-derived vesicles through the autophagy-lysosome system both in vitro and in vivo. We propose that three different genes for PD have a common biological function. More generally, data integration from multiple unbiased screens can provide insight into human disease mechanisms.
20921534	LRRK2 was previously identified as a defective gene in Parkinson's disease, and it is also located in a risk region for Crohn's disease. In this study, we aim to determine whether LRRK2 could be involved in immune responses. We show that LRRK2 expression is enriched in human immune cells. LRRK2 is an IFN-gamma target gene, and its expression increased in intestinal tissues upon Crohn's disease inflammation. In inflamed intestinal tissues, LRRK2 is detected in the lamina propria macrophages, B-lymphocytes, and CD103-positive dendritic cells. Furthermore, LRRK2 expression enhances NF-kappaB-dependent transcription, suggesting its role in immune response signaling. Endogenous LRRK2 rapidly translocates near bacterial membranes, and knockdown of LRRK2 interferes with reactive oxygen species production during phagocytosis and bacterial killing. These observations indicate that LRRK2 is an IFN-gamma target gene, and it might be involved in signaling pathways relevant to Crohn's disease pathogenesis.
21454543	Mutations in leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) are currently the most common genetic cause of familial late-onset Parkinson disease, which is clinically indistinguishable from idiopathic disease. The most common pathological mutation in LRRK2, G2019S LRRK2, is known to cause neurite retraction. However, molecular mechanisms underlying regulation of neurite length by LRRK2 are unknown. Here, we demonstrate a novel interaction between LRRK2 and the Rho GTPase, Rac1, which plays a critical role in actin cytoskeleton remodeling necessary for the maintenance of neurite morphology. LRRK2 binds strongly to endogenous or expressed Rac1, while showing weak binding to Cdc42 and no binding to RhoA. Co-expression with LRRK2 increases Rac1 activity, as shown by increased binding to the p21-activated kinase, which modulates actin cytoskeletal dynamics. LRRK2 constructs carrying mutations that inactivate the kinase or GTPase activities do not activate Rac1. Interestingly, LRRK2 does not increase levels of membrane-bound Rac1 but dramatically changes the cellular localization of Rac1, causing polarization, which is augmented further when LRRK2 is co-expressed with constitutively active Rac1. Four different disease-related mutations in LRRK2 altered binding to Rac1, with the G2019S and R1441C LRRK2 mutations attenuating Rac1 binding and the Y1699C and I2020T LRRK2 mutations increasing binding. Co-expressing Rac1 in SH-SY5Y cells rescues the G2019S mutant phenotype of neurite retraction. We hypothesize that pathological mutations in LRRK2 attenuates activation of Rac1, causing disassembly of actin filaments, leading to neurite retraction. The interactions between LRRK2 and Rho GTPases provide a novel pathway through which LRRK2 might modulate cellular dynamics and contribute to the pathophysiology of Parkinson disease.
17447891	Mutations in the LRRK2 (leucine-rich repeat kinase-2) gene cause late-onset PD (Parkinson's disease). LRRK2 contains leucine-rich repeats, a GTPase domain, a COR [C-terminal of Roc (Ras of complex)] domain, a kinase and a WD40 (Trp-Asp 40) motif. Little is known about how LRRK2 is regulated, what its physiological substrates are or how mutations affect LRRK2 function. Thus far LRRK2 activity has only been assessed by autophosphorylation and phosphorylation of MBP (myelin basic protein), which is catalysed rather slowly. We undertook a KESTREL (kinase substrate tracking and elucidation) screen in rat brain extracts to identify proteins that were phosphorylated by an activated PD mutant of LRRK2 (G2019S). This led to the discovery that moesin, a protein which anchors the actin cytoskeleton to the plasma membrane, is efficiently phosphorylated by LRRK2, at Thr558, a previously identified in-vivo-phosphorylation site that regulates the ability of moesin to bind actin. LRRK2 also phosphorylated ezrin and radixin, which are related to moesin, at the residue equivalent to Thr558, as well as a peptide (LRRKtide: RLGRDKYKTLRQIRQ) encompassing Thr558. We exploited these findings to determine how nine previously reported PD mutations of LRRK2 affected kinase activity. Only one of the mutations analysed, namely G2019S, stimulated kinase activity. Four mutations inhibited LRRK2 kinase activity (R1941H, I2012T, I2020T and G2385R), whereas the remainder (R1441C, R1441G, Y1699C and T2356I) did not influence activity. Therefore the manner in which LRRK2 mutations induce PD is more complex than previously imagined and is not only caused by an increase in LRRK2 kinase activity. Finally, we show that the minimum catalytically active fragment of LRRK2 requires an intact GTPase, COR and kinase domain, as well as a WD40 motif and a C-terminal tail. The results of the present study suggest that moesin, ezrin and radixin may be LRRK2 substrates, findings that have been exploited to develop the first robust quantitative assay to measure LRRK2 kinase activity.
27023913	Mutations in LR RK2 (Leucine rich repeat kinase 2) are a major cause of Parkinson's disease (PD). We and others reported recently that expression of the pathogenic gainof-function mutant form of LRRK2, LRRK2 G2019S, induces mitochondrial fission in neurons through DLP1. Here we provide evidence that expression of LRRK2 G2019S stimulates mitochondria loss or mitophagy. We have characterized several LRRK2 interacting proteins and found that LRRK2 interacts with ULK1 which plays an essential role in autophagy. Knockdown of either ULK1 or DLP1 expression with shRNAs suppresses LRRK2 G2019S expression-induced mitochondrial clearance, suggesting that LRRK2 G2019S expression induces mitochondrial fission through DLP1 followed by mitophagy via an ULK1 dependent pathway. In addition to ULK1, we found that LRRK2 interacts with the endogenous MKK4/7, JIP3 and coordinates with them in the activation of JNK signaling. Interestingly, LRRK2 G2019S-induced loss of mitochondria can also be suppressed by 3 different JNK inhibitors, implying the involvement of the JNK pathway in the pathogenic mechanism of mutated LRRK2. Thus our findings may provide an insight into the complicated pathogenesis of PD as well as some clues to the development of novel therapeutic strategies.
21850687	Mutations in the leucine rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) gene are responsible for autosomal dominant and sporadic Parkinson disease (PD), possibly exerting their effects via a toxic gain of function. A common p.G2019S mutation (rs34637584:A>G) is responsible for up to 30-40% of PD cases in some ethnic populations. Here, we show that LRRK2 interacts with human peroxiredoxin 3 (PRDX3), a mitochondrial member of the antioxidant family of thioredoxin (Trx) peroxidases. Importantly, mutations in the LRRK2 kinase domain significantly increased phosphorylation of PRDX3 compared to wild-type. The increase in PRDX3 phosphorylation was associated with decreased peroxidase activity and increased death in LRRK2-expressing but not in LRRK2-depleted or vector-transfected neuronal cells. LRRK2 mutants stimulated mitochondrial factors involved in apoptosis and induced production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and oxidative modification of macromolecules. Furthermore, immunoblot and immunohistochemical analysis of postmortem human PD patients carrying the p.G2019S mutation showed a marked increase in phosphorylated PRDX3 (p-PRDX3) relative to normal brain. We showed that LRRK2 mutations increase the inhibition of an endogenous peroxidase by phosphorylation promoting dysregulation of mitochondrial function and oxidative damage. Our findings provide a mechanistic link between the enhanced kinase activity of PD-linked LRRK2 and neuronal cell death.
18445495	The leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) has been identified as the defective gene at the PARK8 locus causing the autosomal dominant form of Parkinson's disease (PD). Although several LRRK2 mutations were found in familial as well as sporadic PD patients, its physiological functions are not clearly defined. In this study, using yeast two-hybrid screening, we report the identification of Rab5b as an LRRK2-interacting protein. Indeed, our GST pull down and co-immunoprecipitation assays showed that it specifically interacts with LRRK2. In addition, subcellular fractionation and immunocytochemical analyses confirmed that a fraction of both proteins co-localize in synaptic vesicles. Interestingly, we found that alteration of LRRK2 expression by either overexpression or knockdown of endogenous LRRK2 in primary neuronal cells significantly impairs synaptic vesicle endocytosis. Furthermore, this endocytosis defect was rescued by co-expression of functional Rab5b protein, but not by its inactive form. Taken together, we propose that LRRK2, in conjunction with its interaction with Rab5b, plays an important role in synaptic function by modulating the endocytosis of synaptic vesicles.
23949442	Leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) is a gene that, upon mutation, causes autosomal-dominant familial Parkinson's disease (PD). Yeast two-hybrid screening revealed that Snapin, a SNAP-25 (synaptosomal-associated protein-25) interacting protein, interacts with LRRK2. An in vitro kinase assay exhibited that Snapin is phosphorylated by LRRK2. A glutathione-S-transferase (GST) pull-down assay showed that LRRK2 may interact with Snapin via its Ras-of-complex (ROC) and N-terminal domains, with no significant difference on interaction of Snapin with LRRK2 wild type (WT) or its pathogenic mutants. Further analysis by mutation study revealed that Threonine 117 of Snapin is one of the sites phosphorylated by LRRK2. Furthermore, a Snapin T117D phosphomimetic mutant decreased its interaction with SNAP-25 in the GST pull-down assay. SNAP-25 is a component of the SNARE (Soluble NSF Attachment protein REceptor) complex and is critical for the exocytosis of synaptic vesicles. Incubation of rat brain lysate with recombinant Snapin T117D, but not WT, protein caused decreased interaction of synaptotagmin with the SNARE complex based on a co-immunoprecipitation assay. We further found that LRRK2-dependent phosphorylation of Snapin in the hippocampal neurons resulted in a decrease in the number of readily releasable vesicles and the extent of exocytotic release. Combined, these data suggest that LRRK2 may regulate neurotransmitter release via control of Snapin function by inhibitory phosphorylation.
24113872	Mutations in the gene encoding leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) are the most frequent cause of familial Parkinson's disease (PD). The neuropathology of LRRK2-related PD is heterogeneous and can include aberrant tau phosphorylation or neurofibrillary tau pathology. Recently, LRRK2 has been shown to phosphorylate tau in vitro; however, the major epitopes phosphorylated by LRRK2 and the physiological or pathogenic consequences of these modifications in vivo are unknown. Using mass spectrometry, we identified multiple sites on recombinant tau that are phosphorylated by LRRK2 in vitro, including pT149 and pT153, which are phospho-epitopes that to date have been largely unexplored. Importantly, we demonstrate that expression of transgenic LRRK2 in a mouse model of tauopathy increased the aggregation of insoluble tau and its phosphorylation at T149, T153, T205, and S199/S202/T205 epitopes. These findings indicate that tau can be a LRRK2 substrate and that this interaction can enhance salient features of human disease.
28697798	BACKGROUND: Autosomal-dominant mutations in the Park8 gene encoding Leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) have been identified to cause up to 40% of the genetic forms of Parkinson's disease. However, the function and molecular pathways regulated by LRRK2 are largely unknown. It has been shown that LRRK2 serves as a scaffold during activation of WNT/beta-catenin signaling via its interaction with the beta-catenin destruction complex, DVL1-3 and LRP6. In this study, we examine whether LRRK2 also interacts with signaling components of the WNT/Planar Cell Polarity (WNT/PCP) pathway, which controls the maturation of substantia nigra dopaminergic neurons, the main cell type lost in Parkinson's disease patients. METHODS: Co-immunoprecipitation and tandem mass spectrometry was performed in a mouse substantia nigra cell line (SN4741) and human HEK293T cell line in order to identify novel LRRK2 binding partners. Inhibition of the WNT/beta-catenin reporter, TOPFlash, was used as a read-out of WNT/PCP pathway activation. The capacity of LRRK2 to regulate WNT/PCP signaling in vivo was tested in Xenopus laevis' early development. RESULTS: Our proteomic analysis identified that LRRK2 interacts with proteins involved in WNT/PCP signaling such as the PDZ domain-containing protein GIPC1 and Integrin-linked kinase (ILK) in dopaminergic cells in vitro and in the mouse ventral midbrain in vivo. Moreover, co-immunoprecipitation analysis revealed that LRRK2 binds to two core components of the WNT/PCP signaling pathway, PRICKLE1 and CELSR1, as well as to FLOTILLIN-2 and CULLIN-3, which regulate WNT secretion and inhibit WNT/beta-catenin signaling, respectively. We also found that PRICKLE1 and LRRK2 localize in signalosomes and act as dual regulators of WNT/PCP and beta-catenin signaling. Accordingly, analysis of the function of LRRK2 in vivo, in X. laevis revelaed that LRKK2 not only inhibits WNT/beta-catenin pathway, but induces a classical WNT/PCP phenotype in vivo. CONCLUSIONS: Our study shows for the first time that LRRK2 activates the WNT/PCP signaling pathway through its interaction to multiple WNT/PCP components. We suggest that LRRK2 regulates the balance between WNT/beta-catenin and WNT/PCP signaling, depending on the binding partners. Since this balance is crucial for homeostasis of midbrain dopaminergic neurons, we hypothesize that its alteration may contribute to the pathophysiology of Parkinson's disease.
22899650	Mutations in PARK8, encoding leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2), are a frequent cause of Parkinson's disease (PD). Nonetheless, the physiological role of LRRK2 remains unclear. Here, we demonstrate that LRRK2 participates in canonical Wnt signaling as a scaffold. LRRK2 interacts with key Wnt signaling proteins of the beta-catenin destruction complex and dishevelled proteins in vivo and is recruited to membranes following Wnt stimulation, where it binds to the Wnt co-receptor low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein 6 (LRP6) in cellular models. LRRK2, therefore, bridges membrane and cytosolic components of Wnt signaling. Changes in LRRK2 expression affects pathway activity, while pathogenic LRRK2 mutants reduce both signal strength and the LRRK2-LRP6 interaction. Thus, decreased LRRK2-mediated Wnt signaling caused by reduced binding to LRP6 may underlie the neurodegeneration observed in PD. Finally, a newly developed LRRK2 kinase inhibitor disrupted Wnt signaling to a similar extent as pathogenic LRRK2 mutations. The use of LRRK2 kinase inhibition to treat PD may therefore need reconsideration.
19559761	Autosomal dominant mutations in leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) are the most common genetic cause of late-onset Parkinson's disease. However, the regulators/effectors contributing to the (patho-)physiological functions of LRRK2 remain poorly defined. Here we show that human LRRK2 co-purifies/co-immunoprecipitates with elongation factor 1-alpha (EF1A). Co-incubation of recombinant LRRK2 and EF1A significantly reduces the kinase activity of LRRK2, whereas its GTPase activity remains unchanged. In addition to its canonical role in mRNA translation, EF1A maintains stability of the microtubule cytoskeleton. In the present study, EF1A promotes microtubule assembly in an in vitro tubulin polymerization assay which is impaired by co-incubation with LRRK2 at sub-stoichiometric concentrations. These findings suggest that the interaction between LRRK2 and EF1A may reciprocally modulate their physiological function.
22363216	Mutations in the leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) gene are the most common cause of autosomal dominant familial Parkinson's disease (PD) and also contribute to idiopathic PD. LRRK2 encodes a large multi-domain protein with GTPase and kinase activity. Initial data indicates that an intact functional GTPase domain is critically required for LRRK2 kinase activity. PD-associated mutations in LRRK2, including the most common G2019S variant, have variable effects on enzymatic activity but commonly alter neuronal process morphology. The mechanisms underlying the intrinsic and extrinsic regulation of LRRK2 GTPase and kinase activity, and the pathogenic effects of familial mutations, are incompletely understood. Here, we identify a novel functional interaction between LRRK2 and ADP-ribosylation factor GTPase-activating protein 1 (ArfGAP1). LRRK2 and ArfGAP1 interact in vitro in mammalian cells and in vivo in brain, and co-localize in the cytoplasm and at Golgi membranes. PD-associated and functional mutations that alter the GTPase activity of LRRK2 modulate the interaction with ArfGAP1. The GTP hydrolysis activity of LRRK2 is markedly enhanced by ArfGAP1 supporting a role for ArfGAP1 as a GTPase-activating protein for LRRK2. Unexpectedly, ArfGAP1 promotes the kinase activity of LRRK2 suggesting a potential role for GTP hydrolysis in kinase activation. Furthermore, LRRK2 robustly and directly phosphorylates ArfGAP1 in vitro. Silencing of ArfGAP1 expression in primary cortical neurons rescues the neurite shortening phenotype induced by G2019S LRRK2 overexpression, whereas the co-expression of ArfGAP1 and LRRK2 synergistically promotes neurite shortening in a manner dependent upon LRRK2 GTPase activity. Neurite shortening induced by ArfGAP1 overexpression is also attenuated by silencing of LRRK2. Our data reveal a novel role for ArfGAP1 in regulating the GTPase activity and neuronal toxicity of LRRK2; reciprocally, LRRK2 phosphorylates ArfGAP1 and is required for ArfGAP1 neuronal toxicity. ArfGAP1 may represent a promising target for interfering with LRRK2-dependent neurodegeneration in familial and sporadic PD.
22228096	The leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) mutations are the most common cause of autosomal-dominant Parkinson disease (PD). Mitochondrial dysfunction represents a critical event in the pathogenesis of PD. We demonstrated that wild-type (WT) LRRK2 expression caused mitochondrial fragmentation along with increased mitochondrial dynamin-like protein (DLP1, also known as DRP1), a fission protein, which was further exacerbated by expression of PD-associated mutants (R1441C or G2019S) in both SH-SY5Y and differentiated primary cortical neurons. We also found that LRRK2 interacted with DLP1, and LRRK2-DLP1 interaction was enhanced by PD-associated mutations that probably results in increased mitochondrial DLP1 levels. Co-expression of dominant-negative DLP1 K38A or WT Mfn2 blocked LRRK2-induced mitochondrial fragmentation, mitochondrial dysfunction and neuronal toxicity. Importantly, mitochondrial fragmentation and dysfunction were not observed in cells expressing either GTP-binding deficient mutant LRRK2 K1347A or kinase-dead mutant D1994A which has minimal interaction with DLP1 and did not increase the mitochondrial DLP1 level. We concluded that LRRK2 regulates mitochondrial dynamics by increasing mitochondrial DLP1 through its direct interaction with DLP1, and LRRK2 kinase activity plays a critical role in this process.
22315971	AIMS: The human LRRK2 gene has been identified as the most common causative gene of autosomal-dominantly inherited and idiopathic Parkinson disease (PD). The G2019S substitution is the most common mutation in LRRK2. The R1441C mutation also occurs in cases of familial PD, but is not as prevalent. Some cases of LRRK2-based PD exhibit Tau pathology, which suggests that alterations on LRRK2 activity affect the pathophysiology of Tau. To investigate how LRRK2 might affect Tau and the pathophysiology of PD, we generated lines of C. elegans expressing human LRRK2 [wild-type (WT) or mutated (G2019S or R1441C)] with and without V337M Tau. Expression and redox proteomics were used to identify the effects of LRRK2 (WT and mutant) on protein expression and oxidative modifications. RESULTS: Co-expression of WT LRRK2 and Tau led to increased expression of numerous proteins, including several 60S ribosomal proteins, mitochondrial proteins, and the V-type proton ATPase, which is associated with autophagy. C. elegans expressing mutant LRRK2 showed similar changes, but also showed increased protein oxidation and lipid peroxidation, the latter indexed as increased protein-bound 4-hydroxy-2-nonenal (HNE). INNOVATION: Our study brings new knowledge about the possible alterations induced by LRRK2 (WT and mutated) and Tau interactions, suggesting the involvement of G2019S and R1441C in Tau-dependent neurodegenerative processes. CONCLUSION: These results suggest that changes in LRRK2 expression or activity lead to corresponding changes in mitochondrial function, autophagy, and protein translation. These findings are discussed with reference to the pathophysiology of PD.
20074637	Mutations in leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) are the most frequent cause of autosomal-dominant Parkinson's disease (PD). The second known autosomal-dominant PD gene (SNCA) encodes alpha-synuclein, which is deposited in Lewy bodies, the neuropathological hallmark of PD. LRRK2 contains a kinase domain with homology to mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase kinases (MAPKKKs) and its activity has been suggested to be a key factor in LRRK2-associated PD. Here we investigated the role of LRRK2 in signal transduction pathways to identify putative PD-relevant downstream targets. Over-expression of wild-type [wt]LRRK2 in human embryonic kidney HEK293 cells selectively activated the extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) module. PD-associated mutants G2019S and R1441C, but not kinase-dead LRRK2, induced ERK phosphorylation to the same extent as [wt]LRRK2, indicating that this effect is kinase-dependent. However, ERK activation by mutant R1441C and G2019S was significantly slower than that for [wt]LRRK2, despite similar levels of expression. Furthermore, induction of the ERK module by LRRK2 was associated to a small but significant induction of SNCA, which was suppressed by treatment with the selective MAPK/ERK kinase inhibitor U0126. This pathway linking the two dominant PD genes LRRK2 and SNCA may offer an interesting target for drug therapy in both familial and sporadic disease.
24754922	Leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) mutations are the most common cause of dominant and sporadic Parkinson's disease (PD), a common neurodegenerative disorder. Yeast-two-hybrid screening using human LRRK2 kinase domain as bait identified microtubule associated protein 1B (MAP1B) as a LRRK2 interactor. The interacting domains were LRRK2 kinase and the light chain portion of MAP1B (LC1). LRRK2 + LC1 interaction resulted in LRRK2 kinase inhibition. LRRK2 mutants (R1441C, G2019S and I2020T) exhibited decreased endogenous LC1 expression and its co-expression with LC1 rescued LRRK2 mutant-mediated toxicity. This study presented the first data on the effects of LRRK2 + LC1 interaction and also suggested that LCI possibly rescued LRRK2 mutant-induced cytotoxicity by inhibiting LRRK2 kinase activity. Compounds that upregulate LC1 expression may therefore hold therapeutic potential for LRRK2-linked diseases.
27794539	Mutations in leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) cause late-onset, autosomal dominant familial Parkinson`s disease (PD) and variation at the LRRK2 locus contributes to the risk for idiopathic PD. LRRK2 can function as a protein kinase and mutations lead to increased kinase activity. To elucidate the pathophysiological mechanism of the R1441C mutation in the GTPase domain of LRRK2, we expressed human wild-type or R1441C LRRK2 in dopaminergic neurons of Drosophila and observe reduced locomotor activity, impaired survival and an age-dependent degeneration of dopaminergic neurons thereby creating a new PD-like model. To explore the function of LRRK2 variants in vivo, we performed mass spectrometry and quantified 3,616 proteins in the fly brain. We identify several differentially-expressed cytoskeletal, mitochondrial and synaptic vesicle proteins (SV), including synaptotagmin-1, syntaxin-1A and Rab3, in the brain of this LRRK2 fly model. In addition, a global phosphoproteome analysis reveals the enhanced phosphorylation of several SV proteins, including synaptojanin-1 (pThr1131) and the microtubule-associated protein futsch (pSer4106) in the brain of R1441C hLRRK2 flies. The direct phosphorylation of human synaptojanin-1 by R1441C hLRRK2 could further be confirmed by in vitro kinase assays. A protein-protein interaction screen in the fly brain confirms that LRRK2 robustly interacts with numerous SV proteins, including synaptojanin-1 and EndophilinA. Our proteomic, phosphoproteomic and interactome study in the Drosophila brain provides a systematic analyses of R1441C hLRRK2-induced pathobiological mechanisms in this model. We demonstrate for the first time that the R1441C mutation located within the LRRK2 GTPase domain induces the enhanced phosphorylation of SV proteins in the brain.
24251413	Mutations in leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) are the most common known genetic cause of late-onset Parkinson's disease (PD). However, the penetrance of the disease is below 50% at 60 years of age. LRRK2 is associated with the mitochondrial membrane, and mutant forms impair the function of the organelle and autophagosome clearance in human cells, including induced pluripotent stem cell-derived neurons. Elevated expression of uncoupling proteins has been identified as the cause of mitochondrial depolarization in human fibroblasts with G2019S LRRK2. To identify factors that contribute to the penetrance of LRRK2 mutations, we studied respiratory chain function, markers of mitochondrial uncoupling, oxidative stress, and autophagy in fibroblasts from affected and unaffected carriers of the G2019S mutation. Independent of disease status, all mutation carriers showed reduced mitochondrial membrane potential, increased proton leakage, and more fragmented mitochondria. However, a significant increase in the expression of uncoupling protein 2 (UCP2) was only detected in affected individuals with the G2019S mutation in LRRK2. Since oxidative stress and autophagic markers were selectively increased in some of the PD patients, we hypothesize that UCP2 expression is upregulated in response to elevated reactive oxygen species generation in affected mutation carriers and that UCP2 mRNA levels might, therefore, serve as markers of disease status in LRRK2-associated PD.
19302196	Autosomal dominant mutations in the human Leucine-Rich Repeat Kinase 2 (LRRK2) gene represent the most common monogenetic cause of Parkinson disease (PD) and increased kinase activity observed in pathogenic mutants of LRRK2 is most likely causative for PD-associated neurotoxicity. The sequence of the LRRK2 kinase domain shows similarity to MAP kinase kinase kinases. Furthermore, LRRK2 shares highest sequence homology with mixed linage kinases which act upstream of canonical MAPKK and are involved in cellular stress responses. Therefore, we addressed the question if LRRK2 exhibits MAPKKK activity by systematically testing MAPKKs as candidate substrates, in vitro. We demonstrate that LRRK2 variants phosphorylate mitogen-activated protein kinase kinases (MAPKK), including MKK3 -4, -6 and -7. MKKs act upstream of the MAPK p38 and JNK mediating oxidative cell stress, neurotoxicity and apoptosis. The disease-associated LRRK2 G2019S and I2020T mutations show an increased phosphotransferase activity towards MKKs correlating with the activity shown for its autophosphorylation. Our findings present evidence of a new class of molecular targets for mutant LRRK2 that link to neurotoxicity, cellular stress, cytoskeletal dynamics and vesicular transport.
24351927	Leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) is a multidomain protein implicated in Parkinson disease (PD); however, the molecular mechanism and mode of action of this protein remain elusive. cAMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA), along with other kinases, has been suggested to be an upstream kinase regulating LRRK2 function. Using MS, we detected several sites phosphorylated by PKA, including phosphorylation sites within the Ras of complex proteins (ROC) GTPase domain as well as some previously described sites (S910 and S935). We systematically mapped those sites within LRRK2 and investigated their functional consequences. S1444 in the ROC domain was confirmed as a target for PKA phosphorylation using ROC single-domain constructs and through site-directed mutagenesis. Phosphorylation at S1444 is strikingly reduced in the major PD-related LRRK2 mutations R1441C/G/H, which are part of a consensus PKA recognition site ((1441)RASpS(1444)). Furthermore, our work establishes S1444 as a PKA-regulated 14-3-3 docking site. Experiments of direct binding to the three 14-3-3 isotypes gamma, theta, and zeta with phosphopeptides encompassing pS910, pS935, or pS1444 demonstrated the highest affinities to phospho-S1444. Strikingly, 14-3-3 binding to phospho-S1444 decreased LRRK2 kinase activity in vitro. Moreover, substitution of S1444 by alanine or by introducing the mutations R1441C/G/H, abrogating PKA phosphorylation and 14-3-3 binding, resulted in increased LRRK2 kinase activity. In conclusion, these data clearly demonstrate that LRRK2 kinase activity is modulated by PKA-mediated binding of 14-3-3 to S1444 and suggest that 14-3-3 interaction with LRRK2 is hampered in R1441C/G/H-mediated PD pathogenesis.
26744328	Mutations in leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) cause autosomal-dominant Parkinsonism with pleomorphic pathology including deposits of aggregated protein and neuronal degeneration. The pathogenesis of LRRK2-linked Parkinson's disease (PD) is not fully understood. Here, using co-immunoprecipitation, we found that LRRK2 interacted with synphilin-1 (SP1), a cytoplasmic protein that interacts with alpha-synuclein and has implications in PD pathogenesis. LRRK2 interacted with the N-terminus of SP1 whereas SP1 predominantly interacted with the C-terminus of LRRK2, including kinase domain. Co-expression of SP1 with LRRK2 increased LRRK2-induced cytoplasmic aggregation in cultured cells. Moreover, SP1 also attenuated mutant LRRK2-induced toxicity and reduced LRRK2 kinase activity in cultured cells. Knockdown of SP1 by siRNA enhanced LRRK2 neuronal toxicity. In vivo Drosophila studies, co-expression of SP1 and mutant G2019S-LRRK2 in double transgenic Drosophila increased survival and improved locomotor activity. Expression of SP1 protects against G2019S-LRRK2-induced dopamine neuron loss and reduced LRRK2 phosphorylation in double transgenic fly brains. Our findings demonstrate that SP1 attenuates mutant LRRK2-induced PD-like phenotypes and plays a neural protective role.
21658387	LRRK2 is the causal molecule for autosomal-dominant familial Parkinson's disease, although its true function, including its physiological substrates, remains unknown. Here, using in vitro kinase assay with recombinant proteins, we demonstrated for the first time that LRRK2 directly phosphorylates Akt1, a central molecule involved in signal transduction for cell survival and prevention of apoptosis. Ser473, one of two amino acids essential for Akt1 activation, was the target site for LRRK2. A knockdown experiment using intact cells also demonstrated LRRK2-mediated phosphorylation of Akt1 (Ser473), suggesting that Akt1 is a convincing candidate for the physiological substrate of LRRK2. The disease-associated mutations, R1441C, G2019S, and I2020T, exhibited reduced interaction with, and phosphorylation of, Akt1, suggesting one possible mechanism for the neurodegeneration caused by LRRK2 mutations.
24459295	Mutations in leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) are common causes of familial Parkinson's disease (PD). LRRK2 has been shown to bind peroxiredoxin-3 (PRDX3), the most important scavenger of hydrogen peroxide in the mitochondria, in vitro. Here, we examined the interactions of LRRK2 and PRDX3 in Drosophila models by crossing transgenic LRRK2 and PRDX3 flies. As proof of principle experiments, we subsequently challenged LRRK2 and LRRK2/PRDX3 flies with a peroxidase mimic, Ebselen. We demonstrated that co-expression of PRDX3 with the LRRK2 kinase mutant G2019S in bigenic Drosophila ameliorated the G2019S mutant-induced reduction in peroxidase capacity, loss of dopaminergic neurons, shortened lifespan and mitochondrial defects of flight muscles in monogenic flies expressing the G2019S alone. Challenges with Ebselen recapitulated similar rescue of these phenotypic features in mutant-expressing Drosophila. The peroxidase mimic preserved neuronal and mitochondrial and neuronal integrity and improved mobility and survival in mutant-expressing Drosophila. Taken together, our study provides the first in vivo evidence to suggest that phosphoinhibition of endogenous peroxidases could be a mechanism in LRRK2-induced oxidant-mediated neurotoxicity. Our therapeutic experiments also highlight the potential of thiol peroxidases as neuroprotective agents in PD patients carrying LRRK2 mutations.
25360523	Leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) is a multi-domain 280 kDa protein that is linked to Parkinson's disease (PD). Mutations especially in the GTPase and kinase domains of LRRK2 are the most common causes of heritable PD and are also found in sporadic forms of PD. Although the cellular function of LRRK2 is largely unknown there is increasing evidence that these mutations cause cell death due to autophagic dysfunction and mitochondrial damage. Here, we demonstrate a novel mechanism of LRRK2 binding and transport, which involves the small GTPases Rab32 and Rab38. Rab32 and its closest homologue Rab38 are known to organize the trans-Golgi network and transport of key enzymes in melanogenesis, whereas their function in non-melanogenic cells is still not well understood. Cellular processes such as autophagy, mitochondrial dynamics, phagocytosis or inflammatory processes in the brain have previously been linked to Rab32. Here, we demonstrate that Rab32 and Rab38, but no other GTPase tested, directly interact with LRRK2. GFP-Trap analyses confirmed the interaction of Rab32 with the endogenous LRRK2. In yeast two-hybrid experiments we identified a predicted coiled-coil motif containing region within the aminoterminus of LRRK2 as the possible interacting domain. Fluorescence microscopy demonstrated a co-localization of Rab32 and LRRK2 at recycling endosomes and transport vesicles, while overexpression of a constitutively active mutant of Rab32 led to an increased co-localization with Rab7/9 positive perinuclear late endosomes/MVBs. Subcellular fractionation experiments supported the novel role of Rab32 in LRRK2 late endosomal transport and sorting in the cell. Thus, Rab32 may regulate the physiological functions of LRRK2.
27832104	BACKGROUND: Despite the plethora of sequence variants in LRRK2, only a few clearly segregate with PD. Even within this group of pathogenic mutations, the phenotypic profile can differ widely. OBJECTIVE: We examined multiple properties of LRRK2 behavior in cellular models over-expressing three sequence variants described in Greek PD patients in comparison to several known pathogenic and non-pathogenic LRRK2 mutations, to determine if specific phenotypes associated with pathogenic LRRK2 can be observed in other less-common sequence variants for which pathogenicity is unclear based on clinical and/or genetic data alone. METHODS: The oligomerization, activity, phosphorylation, and interaction with FADD was assessed in HEK293T cells over-expressing LRRK2; while the induction of neuronal death was determined by quantifying apoptotic nuclei in primary neurons transiently expressing LRRK2. RESULTS: One LRRK2 variant, A211V, exhibited a modest increase in kinase activity, whereas only the pathogenic mutants G2019S and I2020T displayed significantly altered auto-phosphorylation. We observed an induction of detergent-insoluble high molecular weight structures upon expression of pathogenic LRRK2 mutants, but not the other LRRK2 variants. In contrast, each of the variants tested induced apoptotic death of cultured neurons similar to pathogenic LRRK2 in a FADD-dependent manner. CONCLUSIONS: Overall, despite differences in some properties of LRRK2 function such as kinase activity and its oligomerization, each of the LRRK2 variants examined induced neuronal death to a similar extent. Furthermore, our findings further strengthen the notion of a convergence on the extrinsic cell death pathway common to mutations in LRRK2 that are capable of inducing neuronal death.
24942733	Mutations in the gene encoding leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) are a common genetic cause of Parkinson disease, but the mechanisms whereby LRRK2 is regulated are unknown. Phosphorylation of LRRK2 at Ser(910)/Ser(935) mediates interaction with 14-3-3. Pharmacological inhibition of its kinase activity abolishes Ser(910)/Ser(935) phosphorylation and 14-3-3 binding, and this effect is also mimicked by pathogenic mutations. However, physiological situations where dephosphorylation occurs have not been defined. Here, we show that arsenite or H2O2-induced stresses promote loss of Ser(910)/Ser(935) phosphorylation, which is reversed by phosphatase inhibition. Arsenite-induced dephosphorylation is accompanied by loss of 14-3-3 binding and is observed in wild type, G2019S, and kinase-dead D2017A LRRK2. Arsenite stress stimulates LRRK2 self-association and association with protein phosphatase 1alpha, decreases kinase activity and GTP binding in vitro, and induces translocation of LRRK2 to centrosomes. Our data indicate that signaling events induced by arsenite and oxidative stress may regulate LRRK2 function.
25605758	Leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) has been identified as a causative gene for Parkinson's disease (PD). LRRK2 contains a kinase and a GTPase domain, both of which provide critical intracellular signal-transduction functions. We showed previously that Rab5b, a small GTPase protein that regulates the motility and fusion of early endosomes, interacts with LRRK2 and co-regulates synaptic vesicle endocytosis. Using recombinant proteins, we show here that LRRK2 phosphorylates Rab5b at its Thr6 residue in in vitro kinase assays with mass spectrophotometry analysis. Phosphorylation of Rab5b by LRRK2 on the threonine residue was confirmed by western analysis using cells stably expressing LRRK2 G2019S. The phosphomimetic T6D mutant exhibited stronger GTPase activity than that of the wild-type Rab5b. In addition, phosphorylation of Rab5b by LRRK2 also exhibited GTPase activity stronger than that of the unphosphorylated Rab5b protein. Two assays testing Rab5's activity, neurite outgrowth analysis and epidermal growth factor receptor degradation assays, showed that Rab5b T6D exhibited phenotypes that were expected to be observed in the inactive Rab5b, including longer neurite length and less degradation of EGFR. These results suggest that LRRK2 kinase activity functions as a Rab5b GTPase activating protein and thus, negatively regulates Rab5b signalling.
20067578	Mutations in leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) are prevalent causes of late-onset Parkinson's disease. Here, we show that LRRK2 binds to MAPK kinases (MKK) 3, 6, and 7, and that LRRK2 is able to phosphorylate MKK3, 6 and 7. Over-expression of LRRK2 and MKK6 increased the steady state levels of each protein beyond that observed with over-expression of either protein alone. Co-expression increased levels of MKK6 in the membrane more than in the cytoplasm. The increased expression of LRRK2 and MKK6 requires MKK6 activity. The disease-linked LRRK2 mutations, G2019S, R1441C and I2020T, enhance binding of LRRK2 to MKK6. This interaction was further supported by in vivo studies in C. elegans. RNAi knockdown in C. elegans of the endogenous orthologs for MKK6 or p38, sek-1 and pmk-1, abolishes LRRK2-mediated protection against mitochondrial stress. These results were confirmed by deletion of sek-1 in C. elegans. These data demonstrate that MKKs and LRRK2 function in similar biological pathways, and support a role for LRRK2 in modulating the cellular stress response.
22652643	The enhanced neurotoxicity of the Parkinson's disease-associated LRRK2 mutant, G2019S, than its wild-type counter-part has recently been reported. Overexpression of LRRK2 (G2019S) in cultured neural cells results in caspase-3-dependent apoptosis via a yet undefined signaling pathway. Elucidation of the mechanism underlying LRRK2 (G2019S) neurotoxicity may offer new insights into the pathogenesis of Parkinson's disease. In this study, we identified glutathione s-transferase P1 (GSTP1) as a selective target whose expression is negatively regulated at the transcriptional levels via promoter hyper-methylation by LRRK2 (G2019S). Overexpression of LRRK2 (G2019S) in the human neuronal cell line SH-SY5Y markedly suppressed the expression of GSTP1 prior to any manifestation of cell death. Moreover, shRNA-mediated knockdown of endogenous GSTP1 expression exacerbated LRRK2 (G2019S) neurotoxicity, whereas overexpression of GSTP1 protected against LRRK2 (G2019S)-induced caspase-3 activation and neuronal apoptosis. In conclusion, the results suggest a previously undefined signaling mechanism underlying the neurotoxic effect of LRRK2 (G2019S), in which LRRK2 (G2019S) triggers oxidative stress in cells and, in turn, results in caspase-dependent apoptosis at least in part by suppressing the expression of GSTP1.
26894577	Mutations in the gene coding for the multi-domain protein leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) are the leading cause of genetically inherited Parkinson's disease (PD). Two of the common found mutations are the R1441C and G2019S. In this study we identified protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A) as an interacting partner of LRRK2. We were able to demonstrate that the Ras of complex protein (ROC) domain is sufficient to interact with the three subunits of PP2A in human neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cells and in HeLa cells. The alpha subunit of PP2A is interacting with LRRK2 in the perinuclear region of HeLa cells. Silencing the catalytic subunit of PP2A by shRNA aggravated cellular degeneration induced by the pathogenic R1441C-LRRK2 mutant expressed in neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cells. A similar enhancement of apoptotic nuclei was observed by downregulation of the catalytic subunit of PP2A in cultured cortical cells derived from neurons overexpressing the pathogenic mutant G2019S-LRRK2. Conversely, pharmacological activation of PP2A by sodium selenate showed a partial neuroprotection from R1441C-LRRK2-induced cellular degeneration. All these data suggest that PP2A is a new interacting partner of LRRK2 and reveal the importance of PP2A as a potential therapeutic target in PD.
26123245	Hyperphosphorylation and aggregation of tau are observed in multiple neurodegenerative diseases termed tauopathies. Tau has also been implicated in the pathogenesis of Parkinson's disease (PD) and parkinsonisms. Some PD patients with mutations in the leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) gene exhibit tau pathology. Mutations in LRRK2 are a major risk factor for PD, but LRRK2 protein function remains unclear. The most common mutation, G2019S, is located in the kinase domain of LRRK2 and enhances kinase activity in vitro. This suggests that the kinase activity of LRRK2 may underlie its cellular toxicity. Recently, in vitro studies have suggested a direct interaction between tubulin-bound tau and LRRK2 that results in tau phosphorylation at one identified site. Here we present data suggesting that microtubules (MTs) enhance LRRK2-mediated tau phosphorylation at three different epitopes. We also explore the effect of divalent cations as catalytic cofactors for G2019S LRRK2-mediated tau phosphorylation and show that manganese does not support kinase activity but inhibits the efficient ability of magnesium to catalyze LRRK2-mediated phosphorylation of tau. These results suggest that cofactors such as MTs and cations in the cellular milieu have an important impact on LRRK2-tau interactions and resultant tau phosphorylation.
19625296	Mutations in PARK8, encoding LRRK2, are the most common known cause of Parkinson's disease. The LRRK2 Roc-COR tandem domain exhibits GTPase activity controlling LRRK2 kinase activity via an intramolecular process. We report the interaction of LRRK2 with the dishevelled family of phosphoproteins (DVL1-3), key regulators of Wnt (Wingless/Int) signalling pathways important for axon guidance, synapse formation and neuronal maintenance. Interestingly, DVLs can interact with and mediate the activation of small GTPases with structural similarity to the LRRK2 Roc domain. The LRRK2 Roc-COR domain and the DVL1 DEP domain were necessary and sufficient for LRRK2-DVL1 interaction. Co-expression of DVL1 increased LRRK2 steady-state protein levels, an effect that was dependent on the DEP domain. Strikingly, LRRK2-DVL1-3 interactions were disrupted by the familial PARK8 mutation Y1699C, whereas pathogenic mutations at residues R1441 and R1728 strengthened LRRK2-DVL1 interactions. Co-expression of DVL1 with LRRK2 in mammalian cells resulted in the redistribution of LRRK2 to typical cytoplasmic DVL1 aggregates in HEK293 and SH-SY5Y cells and co-localization in neurites and growth cones of differentiated dopaminergic SH-SY5Y cells. This is the first report of the modulation of a key LRRK2-accessory protein interaction by PARK8 Roc-COR domain mutations segregating with Parkinson's disease. Since the DVL1 DEP domain is known to be involved in the regulation of small GTPases, we propose that: (i) DVLs may influence LRRK2 GTPase activity, and (ii) Roc-COR domain mutations modulating LRRK2-DVL interactions indirectly influence kinase activity. Our findings also link LRRK2 to Wnt signalling pathways, suggesting novel pathogenic mechanisms and new targets for genetic analysis in Parkinson's disease.
24916379	Leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) is a complex kinase and mutations in LRRK2 are perhaps the most common genetic cause of Parkinson's disease (PD). However, the identification of the normal physiological function of LRRK2 remains elusive. Here, we show that LRRK2 protects neurons against apoptosis induced by the Drosophila genes grim, hid and reaper. Genetic dissection reveals that Akt is the critical downstream kinase of LRRK2 that phosphorylates and inhibits FOXO1, and thereby promotes survival. Like human LRRK2, Drosophila lrrk also promotes neuron survival; lrrk loss-of-function mutant displays reduced cell numbers, which can be rescued by LRRK2 expression. Importantly, LRRK2 G2019S and LRRK2 R1441C mutants impair the ability of LRRK2 to activate Akt, and fail to prevent apoptotic death. Ectopic expression of a constitutive active form of Akt hence is sufficient to rescue this functional deficit. These data establish that LRRK2 can protect neurons from apoptotic insult through a survival pathway in which LRRK2 signals to activate Akt, and then inhibits FOXO1. These results might indicate that a LRRK-Akt therapeutic pathway to promote neuron survival and to prevent neurodegeneration in Parkinson's disease.
21370995	PD (Parkinson's disease) is the most common neurodegenerative movement disorder. Mutations in LRRK2 (leucine-rich repeat kinase 2) gene are linked to the most common inherited and sporadic PD. Overexpression of LRRK2 and its mutants could induce mitochondrial-dependent neuronal apoptosis. However, the underlying mechanism remains elusive. We have identified several novel LRRK2 interacting proteins and showed that LRRK2 can interact with three components of the PTPC (permeability transition pore complex) including ANT (adenine nucleotide translocator), VDAC (voltage-dependent anion channel) and uMtCK [ubiquitous MtCK (mitochondrial creatine kinase)]. Those components have been reported to be involved in the permeability of mitochondrial membrane. We provide evidence that LRRK2 is likely to interact with uMtCK directly and expression of LRRK2 and its mutant form can suppress the processing of the immature form of uMtCK. LRRK2 expression keeps the uMtCK preprotein on the outer mitochondrial membrane instead of entering the mitochondria. In addition, the expression of both wild-type and mutant forms of LRRK2 promotes the interaction between ANT and VDAC, which plays a role in permeabilization transition pore opening. Finally, LRRK2-induced cell death can be suppressed by uMtCK. Our findings imply that LRRK2 can interact directly with uMtCK to block its entry into mitochondria and its subsequent processing, resulting in inhibition of mitochondrial energy channelling. Meanwhile, the decrease of uMtCK in mitochondria results in elevated interaction between ANT and VDAC and leads to neuronal apoptosis. Thus, our study provides the rational for clinical trials using creatine to treat PD and supports the notion of exploiting LRRK2 as a drug target for PD.
21390248	BACKGROUND: Recent studies show that mutations in Leucine Rich Repeat Kinase 2 (LRRK2) are the cause of the most common inherited and some sporadic forms of Parkinson's disease (PD). The molecular mechanism underlying the pathogenic role of LRRK2 mutations in PD remains unknown. METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Using affinity purification and mass spectrometric analysis, we investigated phosphorylation sites and binding proteins of LRRK2 purified from mouse brain. We identified multiple phosphorylation sites at N-terminus of LRRK2 including S910, S912, S935 and S973. Focusing on the high stoichiometry S935 phosphorylation site, we developed an anti-pS935 specific antibody and showed that LRRK2 is constitutively phosphorylated at S935 in various tissues (including brain) and at different ages in mice. We find that 14-3-3 proteins (especially isoforms gamma and eta) bind LRRK2 and this binding depends on phosphorylation of S935. The binding of 14-3-3, with little effect on dimer formation of LRRK2, confers protection of the phosphorylation status of S935. Furthermore, we show that protein kinase A (PKA), but not LRRK2 kinase itself, can cause the phosphorylation of LRRK2 at S935 in vitro and in cell culture, suggesting that PKA is a potential upstream kinase that regulates LRRK2 function. Finally, our study indicates that the common PD-related mutations of LRRK2, R1441G, Y1699C and G2019S, decrease homeostatic phosphorylation levels of S935 and impair 14-3-3 binding of LRRK2. CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: LRRK2 is extensively phosphorylated in vivo, and the phosphorylation of specific sites (e.g. S935) determines 14-3-3 binding of LRRK2. We propose that 14-3-3 is an important regulator of LRRK2-mediated cellular functions. Our study suggests that PKA, a cAMP-dependent kinase involved in regulating dopamine physiology, is a potential upstream kinase that phosphorylates LRRK2 at S935. Furthermore, the reduction of phosphorylation/14-3-3 binding of LRRK2 due to the common familial PD-related mutations provides novel insight into the pathogenic mechanism of LRRK2-linked PD.
21048939	BACKGROUND: Mutations within the leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) gene are a common cause of familial and sporadic Parkinson's disease. The multidomain protein LRRK2 exhibits overall low GTPase and kinase activity in vitro. METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Here, we show that the rho guanine nucleotide exchange factor ARHGEF7 and the small GTPase CDC42 are interacting with LRRK2 in vitro and in vivo. GTPase activity of full-length LRRK2 increases in the presence of recombinant ARHGEF7. Interestingly, LRRK2 phosphorylates ARHGEF7 in vitro at previously unknown phosphorylation sites. We provide evidence that ARHGEF7 might act as a guanine nucleotide exchange factor for LRRK2 and that R1441C mutant LRRK2 with reduced GTP hydrolysis activity also shows reduced binding to ARHGEF7. CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Downstream effects of phosphorylation of ARHGEF7 through LRRK2 could be (i) a feedback control mechanism for LRRK2 activity as well as (ii) an impact of LRRK2 on actin cytoskeleton regulation. A newly identified familial mutation N1437S, localized within the GTPase domain of LRRK2, further underlines the importance of the GTPase domain of LRRK2 in Parkinson's disease pathogenesis.
28202711	Binding of 14-3-3 proteins to leucine-rich repeat protein kinase 2 (LRRK2) is known to be impaired by many Parkinson's disease (PD)-relevant mutations. Abrogation of this interaction is connected to enhanced LRRK2 kinase activity, which in turn is implicated in increased ubiquitination of LRRK2, accumulation of LRRK2 into inclusion bodies and reduction in neurite length. Hence, the interaction between 14-3-3 and LRRK2 is of significant interest as a possible drug target for the treatment of PD. However, LRRK2 possesses multiple sites that, upon phosphorylation, can bind to 14-3-3, thus rendering the interaction relatively complex. Using biochemical assays and crystal structures, we characterize the multivalent interaction between these two proteins.
26646749	BACKGROUND: Over-activated microglia and chronic neuroinflammation contribute to dopaminergic neuron degeneration and progression of Parkinson's disease (PD). Leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2), a kinase mutated in autosomal dominantly inherited and sporadic PD cases, is highly expressed in immune cells, in which it regulates inflammation through a yet unclear mechanism. METHODS: Here, using pharmacological inhibition and cultured Lrrk2 (-/-) primary microglia cells, we validated LRRK2 as a positive modulator of inflammation and we investigated its specific function in microglia cells. RESULTS: Inhibition or genetic deletion of LRRK2 causes reduction of interleukin-1beta and cyclooxygenase-2 expression upon lipopolysaccharide-mediated inflammation. LRRK2 also takes part of the signaling trigged by alpha-synuclein fibrils, which culminates in induction of inflammatory mediators. At the molecular level, loss of LRRK2 or inhibition of its kinase activity results in increased phosphorylation of nuclear factor kappa-B (NF-kappaB) inhibitory subunit p50 at S337, a protein kinase A (PKA)-specific phosphorylation site, with consequent accumulation of p50 in the nucleus. CONCLUSIONS: Taken together, these findings point to a role of LRRK2 in microglia activation and sustainment of neuroinflammation and in controlling of NF-kappaB p50 inhibitory signaling. Understanding the molecular pathways coordinated by LRRK2 in activated microglia cells after pathological stimuli such us fibrillar alpha-synuclein holds the potential to provide novel targets for PD therapeutics.
27378696	Multiple missense mutations in Leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) have been linked to Parkinson's disease (PD), the most common degenerative movement disorder. LRRK2 is expressed by both neurons and microglia, the residential immune cells in the brain. Increasing evidence supports a role of LRRK2 in modulating microglial activity, of which Lrrk2-null rodent microglia display less inflammatory response to endotoxin lipopolysaccharide (LPS). The underlying molecular mechanism, however, remains elusive. Chemokine (C-X3-C) receptor 1 (CX3CR1), predominantly expressed by microglia, suppresses microglial inflammation while promotes migration. Using whole-genome microarray screening, we found that Cx3cr1 mRNA levels were substantially higher in microglia derived from Lrrk2 knockout (Lrrk2-/-) mice. The total and cell surface levels of CX3CR1 proteins were also remarkably increased. In correlation with the enhanced CX3CR1 expression, Lrrk2-null microglia migrated faster and travelled longer distance toward the source of fractalkine (CX3CL1), an endogenous ligand of CX3CR1. To investigate the impact of CX3CR1 elevation in vivo, we compared LPS-induced inflammation in the striatum of Lrrk2-/- knockout mice with Cx3cr1 heterozygous and homozygous knockout background. We found that a complete loss of Cx3cr1 restored the responsiveness of Lrrk2-/- microglia to LPS stimulation. In conclusion, our findings reveal a previously unknown regulatory role for LRRK2 in CX3CR1 signalling and suggest that an increase of CX3CR1 activity contributes to the attenuated inflammatory responses in Lrrk2-null microglia.
20090955	Mutations in the gene encoding Leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) are the most common cause of inherited Parkinson's disease (PD). LRRK2 is a multi-domain protein kinase containing a central catalytic core and a number of protein-protein interaction domains. An important step forward in the understanding of both the biology and the pathology of LRRK2 would be achieved by identification of its authentic physiological substrates. In the present study we examined phosphorylation of 4E-BP (eukaryotic initiation factor 4E (eIF4E)-binding protein), a recently proposed substrate for LRRKs. We found that LRRK2 is capable of phosphorylating 4E-BP in vitro. The PD related LRRK2-G2019S mutant was approximately 2 fold more active than wild type protein. However, LRRK2 autophosphorylation was stronger than 4E-BP phosphorylation under conditions of molar excess of 4E-BP to LRRK2. We also tested three other kinases (STK3, MAPK14/p38alpha and DAPK2) and found that MAPK14/p38alpha could efficiently phosphorylate 4E-BP at the same site as LRRK2 in vitro. Finally, we did not see changes in 4E-BP phosphorylation levels using inducible expression of LRRK2 in HEK cell lines. We also found that MAPK14/p38alpha phosphorylates 4E-BP in transient overexpression experiments whereas LRRK2 did not. We suggest that increased 4E-BP phosphorylation reported in some systems may be related to p38-mediated cell stress rather than direct LRRK2 activity. Overall, our results suggest that 4E-BP is a relatively poor direct substrate for LRRK2.
26930193	BACKGROUND: Recent studies have linked certain single nucleotide polymorphisms in the leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) gene with Parkinson's disease (PD). Among the mutations, LRRK2 c.4883G>C (R1628P) variant was identified to have a significant association with the risk of PD in ethnic Han-Chinese populations. But the molecular pathological mechanisms of R1628P mutation in PD is still unknown. PRINCIPLE FINDINGS: Unlike other LRRK2 mutants in the Roc-COR-Kinase domain, the R1628P mutation didn't alter the LRRK2 kinase activity and promote neuronal death directly. LRRK2 R1628P mutation increased the binding affinity of LRRK2 with Cyclin-dependent kinase 5 (Cdk5). Interestingly, R1628P mutation turned its adjacent amino acid residue S1627 on LRRK2 protein to a novel phosphorylation site of Cdk5, which could be defined as a typical type II (+) phosphorylation-related single nucleotide polymorphism. Importantly, we showed that the phosphorylation of S1627 by Cdk5 could activate the LRRK2 kinase, and neurons ectopically expressing R1628P displayed a higher sensitivity to 1-methyl-4-phenylpyridinium, a bioactive metabolite of environmental toxin MPTP, in a Cdk5-dependent manner. CONCLUSION: Our data indicate that Parkinson-related LRRK2 mutation R1628P leads to Cdk5 phosphorylation of LRRK2 at S1627, which would upregulate the kinase activity of LRRK2 and consequently cause neuronal death.
27631370	The deposit of polyubiquitinated aggregates has been implicated in the pathophysiology of Parkinson's disease (PD), and growing evidence indicates that selective autophagy plays a critical role in the clearance of ubiquitin-positive protein aggregates by autophagosomes. The selective autophagic receptor p62/SQSTM-1, which associates directly with both ubiquitin and LC3, transports ubiquitin conjugates to autophagosomes for degradation. Leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2), a PD-associated protein kinase, is tightly controlled by autophagy-lysosome degradation as well as by the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. However, little is known about the degradation of ubiquitinated LRRK2 via selective autophagy. In the present study, we found that p62/SQSTM-1 physically interacts with LRRK2 as a selective autophagic receptor. The overexpression of p62 leads to the robust degradation of LRRK2 through the autophagy-lysosome pathway. In addition, LRRK2 indirectly regulates Ser351 and Ser403 phosphorylation of p62. Of particular interest, the interaction between phosphorylated p62 and Keap1 is reduced by LRRK2 overexpression. Therefore, we propose that the interplay between LRRK2 and p62 may contribute to the pathophysiological function and homeostasis of LRRK2 protein.
22012985	Mutations in the leucine-rich repeat kinase-2 (LRRK2) gene cause late-onset Parkinson's disease, but its physiological function has remained largely unknown. Here we report that LRRK2 activates a calcium-dependent protein kinase kinase-beta (CaMKK-beta)/adenosine monophosphate (AMP)-activated protein kinase (AMPK) pathway which is followed by a persistent increase in autophagosome formation. Simultaneously, LRKR2 overexpression increases the levels of the autophagy receptor p62 in a protein synthesis-dependent manner, and decreases the number of acidic lysosomes. The LRRK2-mediated effects result in increased sensitivity of cells to stressors associated with abnormal protein degradation. These effects can be mimicked by the lysosomal Ca(2+)-mobilizing messenger nicotinic acid adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NAADP) and can be reverted by an NAADP receptor antagonist or expression of dominant-negative receptor constructs. Collectively, our data indicate a molecular mechanism for LRRK2 deregulation of autophagy and reveal previously unidentified therapeutic targets.
22988879	Mutations in LRRK2 (leucine-rich repeat kinase 2) represent a significant component of both sporadic and familial PD (Parkinson's disease). Pathogenic mutations cluster in the enzymatic domains of LRRK2, and kinase activity seems to correlate with cytotoxicity, suggesting the possibility of kinase-based therapeutic strategies for LRRK2-associated PD. Apart from cytotoxicity, changes in autophagy have consistently been observed upon overexpression of mutant, or knockdown of endogenous, LRRK2. However, delineating the precise mechanism(s) by which LRRK2 regulates autophagy has been difficult. Recent data suggest a mechanism involving late steps in autophagic-lysosomal clearance in a manner dependent on NAADP (nicotinic acid-adenine dinucleotide phosphate)-sensitive lysosomal Ca2+ channels. In the present paper, we review our current knowledge of the link between LRRK2 and autophagic-lysosomal clearance, including regulation of Ca2+-dependent events involving NAADP.
19536328	Dominantly inherited mutations in the leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 gene (LRRK2) are the most common cause of familial Parkinson's disease (PD) and have also been identified in individuals with sporadic PD. Although the exact cellular function of LRRK2 remains unknown, most PD-linked mutations appear to be toxic to cells in culture via mechanisms that depend on the kinase activity of LRRK2 or on the formation of cytoplasmic inclusions. Here we show that the E3 ubiquitin ligase CHIP physically associates with LRRK2 and regulates the cellular abundance of LRRK2. We further show that LRRK2 forms a complex with overexpressed and endogenous CHIP and Hsp90. Our data indicates that the destabilization of LRRK2 by CHIP is due to ubiquitination and proteasome-dependent degradation. Hsp90 can attenuate CHIP-mediated degradation and this can be blocked by the Hsp90 inhibitor geldanamycin. These findings provide important insight into the cellular regulation of LRRK2 stability and may lead to the development of therapeutics to treat PD based on controlling LRRK2 stability.
28320779	Autosomal dominant mutations in leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) are associated with Parkinson's disease (PD). Most pathogenic LRRK2 mutations result in amino acid substitutions in the central ROC (Ras of complex proteins)-C-terminus of ROC-kinase triple domain and affect enzymatic functions of the protein. However, there are several variants in LRRK2, including the risk factor G2385R, that affect PD pathogenesis by unknown mechanisms. Previously, we have shown that G2385R LRRK2 has decreased kinase activity in vitro and altered affinity to LRRK2 interactors. Specifically, we found an increased binding to the chaperone Hsp90 (heat shock protein 90 kDa) that is known to stabilize LRRK2, suggesting that G2385R may have structural effects on LRRK2. In the present study, we further explored the effects of G2385R on LRRK2 in cells. We found that G2385R LRRK2 has lower steady-state intracellular protein levels compared with wild-type LRRK2 due to increased protein turnover of the mutant protein. Mechanistically, this is a consequence of a higher affinity of G2385R compared with the wild-type protein for two proteins involved in proteasomal degradation, Hsc70 and carboxyl-terminus of Hsc70-interacting protein (CHIP). Overexpression of CHIP decreased intracellular protein levels of both G2385R mutant and wild-type LRRK2, while short interfering RNA CHIP knockdown had the opposite effect. We suggest that the G2385R substitution tilts the equilibrium between refolding and proteasomal degradation toward intracellular degradation. The observation of lower steady-state protein levels may explain why G2385R is a risk factor rather than a penetrant variant for inherited PD.
24165324	Leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) has been identified as the causal molecule for autosomal-dominant Parkinson's disease (PD). Experimental evidence indicates that LRRK2 may play an important role in the pathology induced by abnormal phosphorylation of tau. In the present study, we demonstrated that LRRK2 directly associates with GSK-3beta, and that this interaction enhances the kinase activity of GSK-3beta. Furthermore, we found that LRRK2-mediated activation of GSK-3beta induces high phosphorylation of tau at Ser396 in SH-SY5Y cells. From our present findings, we conclude that LRRK2 may function as a novel enhancer for GSK-3beta and as a physiological regulator of neurite outgrowth and axonal transport through regulation of the GSK-3beta-mediated phosphorylation of tau at the cellular level. Since LRRK2 is detected in tau-positive inclusions in brain tissue affected by various neurodegenerative disorders, including PD, LRRK2-stimulated phosphorylation of tau by GSK-3beta may be involved in development of pathological features in the initial stage of PD.
26056228	Leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) is the causative molecule of the autosomal dominant hereditary form of Parkinson's disease (PD), PARK8, which was originally defined in a study of a Japanese family (the Sagamihara family) harboring the I2020T mutation in the kinase domain. Although a number of reported studies have focused on cell death mediated by mutant LRRK2, details of the pathogenetic effect of LRRK2 still remain to be elucidated. In the present study, to elucidate the mechanism of neurodegeneration in PD caused by LRRK2, we generated induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSC) derived from fibroblasts of PD patients with I2020T LRRK2 in the Sagamihara family. We found that I2020T mutant LRRK2 iPSC-derived neurons released less dopamine than control-iPSC-derived neurons. Furthermore, we demonstrated that patient iPSC-derived neurons had a lower phospho-AKT level than control-iPSC-derived neurons, and that the former showed an increased incidence of apoptosis relative to the controls. Interestingly, patient iPSC-derived neurons exhibited activation of glycogen synthase kinase-3beta (GSK-3beta) and high Tau phosphorylation. In addition, the postmortem brain of the patient from whom the iPSC had been established exhibited deposition of neurofibrillary tangles as well as increased Tau phosphorylation in neurons. These results suggest that I2020T LRRK2-iPSC could be a promising new tool for reproducing the pathology of PD in the brain caused by the I2020T mutation, and applicable as a model in studies of targeted therapeutics.
19196961	Mutation in leucine-rich repeat kinase-2 (LRRK2) is the most common cause of late-onset Parkinson's disease (PD). Although most cases of PD are sporadic, some are inherited, including those caused by LRRK2 mutations. Because these mutations may be associated with a toxic gain of function, controlling the expression of LRRK2 may decrease its cytotoxicity. Here we show that the carboxyl terminus of HSP70-interacting protein (CHIP) binds, ubiquitinates, and promotes the ubiquitin proteasomal degradation of LRRK2. Overexpression of CHIP protects against and knockdown of CHIP exacerbates toxicity mediated by mutant LRRK2. Moreover, HSP90 forms a complex with LRRK2, and inhibition of HSP90 chaperone activity by 17AAG leads to proteasomal degradation of LRRK2, resulting in increased cell viability. Thus, increasing CHIP E3 ligase activity and blocking HSP90 chaperone activity can prevent the deleterious effects of LRRK2. These findings point to potential treatment options for LRRK2-associated PD.
27720484	Synapses are often far from the soma and independently cope with proteopathic stress induced by intense neuronal activity. However, how presynaptic compartments turn over proteins is poorly understood. We show that the synapse-enriched protein EndophilinA, thus far studied for its role in endocytosis, induces macroautophagy at presynaptic terminals. We find that EndophilinA executes this unexpected function at least partly independent of its role in synaptic vesicle endocytosis. EndophilinA-induced macroautophagy is activated when the kinase LRRK2 phosphorylates the EndophilinA-BAR domain and is blocked in animals where EndophilinA cannot be phosphorylated. EndophilinA-phosphorylation promotes the formation of highly curved membranes, and reconstitution experiments show these curved membranes serve as docking stations for autophagic factors, including Atg3. Functionally, deregulation of the EndophilinA phosphorylation state accelerates activity-induced neurodegeneration. Given that EndophilinA is connected to at least three Parkinson's disease genes (LRRK2, Parkin and Synaptojanin), dysfunction of EndophilinA-dependent synaptic macroautophagy may be common in this disorder.
20881132	Intraneuronal tau aggregations are distinctive pathological features of Parkinson's disease (PD) with autosomal-dominant mutations in leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2). The most prevalent LRRK2 mutation, G2019S (glycine to serine substitution at amino acid 2019), causes neurite shrinkage through unclear pathogenetic mechanisms. We found that expression of G2019S mutant in Drosophila dendritic arborization neurons induces mislocalization of the axonal protein tau in dendrites and causes dendrite degeneration. G2019S-induced dendrite degeneration is suppressed by reducing the level of tau protein and aggravated by tau coexpression. Additional genetic analyses suggest that G2019S and tau function synergistically to cause microtubule fragmentation, inclusion formation, and dendrite degeneration. Mechanistically, hyperactivated G2019S promotes tau phosphorylation at the T212 site by the Drosophila glycogen synthase kinase 3beta homolog Shaggy (Sgg). G2019S increases the recruitment of autoactivated Sgg, thus inducing hyperphosphorylation and mislocalization of tau with resultant dendrite degeneration.
28888991	Leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2), a multi-domain protein, is a key causative factor in Parkinson's disease (PD). Identification of novel substrates and the molecular mechanisms underlying the effects of LRRK2 are essential for understanding the pathogenesis of PD. In this study, we showed that LRRK2 played an important role in neuronal cell death by directly phosphorylating and activating apoptosis signal-regulating kinase 1 (ASK1). LRRK2 phosphorylated ASK1 at Thr832 that is adjacent to Thr845, which serves as an autophosphorylation site. Moreover, results of binding and kinase assays showed that LRRK2 acted as a scaffolding protein by interacting with each components of the ASK1-MKK3/6-p38 MAPK pathway through its specific domains and increasing the proximity to downstream targets. Furthermore, LRRK2-induced apoptosis was suppressed by ASK1 inhibition in neuronal stem cells derived from patients with PD. These results clearly indicate that LRRK2 acts as an upstream kinase in the ASK1 pathway and plays an important role in the pathogenesis of PD.
24479685	The gene encoding leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) comprises a major risk factor for Parkinson's disease. Recently, it has emerged that LRRK2 plays important roles in the immune system. LRRK2 is induced by interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma) in monocytes, but the signaling pathway is not known. Here, we show that IFN-gamma-mediated induction of LRRK2 was suppressed by pharmacological inhibition and RNA interference of the extracellular signal-regulated kinase 5 (ERK5). This was confirmed by LRRK2 immunostaining, which also revealed that the morphological responses to IFN-gamma were suppressed by ERK5 inhibitor treatment. Both human acute monocytic leukemia THP-1 cells and human peripheral blood monocytes stimulated the ERK5-LRRK2 pathway after differentiation into macrophages. Thus, LRRK2 is induced via a novel, ERK5-dependent IFN-gamma signal transduction pathway, pointing to new functions of ERK5 and LRRK2 in human macrophages. Leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) is a major risk factor for the development of Parkinson's disease (PD). However, the role of LRRK2 in the affected neurons remains enigmatic. Recently, LRRK2 has been reported to be strongly expressed in the immune system. Here, we demonstrate that LRRK2 is induced by Interferon gamma via extracellular signal-regulated kinase 5 (ERK5) in macrophages, thus providing new insights in LRRK2 and ERK5 biology.
26216903	Constructing the dendritic arbor of neurons requires dynamic movements of Golgi outposts (GOPs), the prominent component in the dendritic secretory pathway. GOPs move toward dendritic ends (anterograde) or cell bodies (retrograde), whereas most of them remain stationary. Here, we show that Leucine-rich repeat kinase (Lrrk), the Drosophila melanogaster homologue of Parkinson's disease-associated Lrrk2, regulates GOP dynamics in dendrites. Lrrk localized at stationary GOPs in dendrites and suppressed GOP movement. In Lrrk loss-of-function mutants, anterograde movement of GOPs was enhanced, whereas Lrrk overexpression increased the pool size of stationary GOPs. Lrrk interacted with the golgin Lava lamp and inhibited the interaction between Lva and dynein heavy chain, thus disrupting the recruitment of dynein to Golgi membranes. Whereas overexpression of kinase-dead Lrrk caused dominant-negative effects on GOP dynamics, overexpression of the human LRRK2 mutant G2019S with augmented kinase activity promoted retrograde movement. Our study reveals a pathogenic pathway for LRRK2 mutations causing dendrite degeneration.
24915984	BACKGROUND: Parkinson's disease (PD) is the most common movement neurodegenerative movement disorder. An incomplete understanding of the molecular pathways involved in its pathogenesis impedes the development of effective disease-modifying treatments. To address this gap, we have previously generated a Drosophila model of PD that overexpresses PD pathogenic mutant form of the second most common causative gene of PD, Leucine-Rich Repeat Kinase 2 (LRRK2). FINDINGS: We employed this model in a genetic modifier screen and identified a gene that encodes for a core subunit of retromer - a complex essential for the sorting and recycling of specific cargo proteins from endosomes to the trans-Golgi network and cell surface. We present evidence that overexpression of the Vps35 or Vps26 component of the cargo-recognition subunit of the retromer complex ameliorates the pathogenic mutant LRRK2 eye phenotype. Furthermore, overexpression of Vps35 or Vps26 significantly protects from the locomotor deficits observed in mutant LRRK2 flies, as assessed by the negative geotaxis assay, and rescues their shortened lifespan. Strikingly, overexpressing Vps35 alone protects from toxicity of rotenone, a neurotoxin commonly used to model parkinsonism, both in terms of lifespan and locomotor activity of the flies, and this protection is sustained and even augmented in the presence of mutant LRRK2. Finally, we demonstrate that knocking down expression of Vps35 in dopaminergic neurons causes a significant locomotor impairment. CONCLUSIONS: From these results we conclude that LRRK2 plays a role in the retromer pathway and that this pathway is involved in PD pathogenesis.
19692353	Mutations in the LRRK2 gene are the most common genetic cause of familial Parkinson's disease (PD). However, its physiological and pathological functions are unknown. Therefore, we generated several independent Drosophila lines carrying WT or mutant human LRRK2 (mutations in kinase, COR or LRR domains, resp.). Ectopic expression of WT or mutant LRRK2 in dopaminergic neurons caused their significant loss accompanied by complex age-dependent changes in locomotor activity. Overall, the ubiquitous expression of LRRK2 increased lifespan and fertility of the flies. However, these flies were more sensitive to rotenone. LRRK2 expression in the eye exacerbated retinal degeneration. Importantly, in double transgenic flies, various indices of the eye and dopaminergic survival were modified in a complex fashion by a concomitant expression of PINK1, DJ-1 or Parkin. This evidence suggests a genetic interaction between these PD-relevant genes.
24725412	Mutations in leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) are a common cause of familial and sporadic Parkinson's disease (PD). Elevated LRRK2 kinase activity and neurodegeneration are linked, but the phosphosubstrate that connects LRRK2 kinase activity to neurodegeneration is not known. Here, we show that ribosomal protein s15 is a key pathogenic LRRK2 substrate in Drosophila and human neuron PD models. Phosphodeficient s15 carrying a threonine 136 to alanine substitution rescues dopamine neuron degeneration and age-related locomotor deficits in G2019S LRRK2 transgenic Drosophila and substantially reduces G2019S LRRK2-mediated neurite loss and cell death in human dopamine and cortical neurons. Remarkably, pathogenic LRRK2 stimulates both cap-dependent and cap-independent mRNA translation and induces a bulk increase in protein synthesis in Drosophila, which can be prevented by phosphodeficient T136A s15. These results reveal a novel mechanism of PD pathogenesis linked to elevated LRRK2 kinase activity and aberrant protein synthesis in vivo.
25427558	Mutations in leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) are the most common cause of dominant-inherited Parkinson's disease (PD), and yet we do not fully understand the physiological function(s) of LRRK2. Various components of the clathrin machinery have been recently found mutated in familial forms of PD. Here, we provide molecular insight into the association of LRRK2 with the clathrin machinery. We report that through its GTPase domain, LRRK2 binds directly to clathrin-light chains (CLCs). Using genome-edited HA-LRRK2 cells, we localize LRRK2 to endosomes on the degradative pathway, where it partially co-localizes with CLCs. Knockdown of CLCs and/or LRRK2 enhances the activation of the small GTPase Rac1, leading to alterations in cell morphology, including the disruption of neuronal dendritic spines. In Drosphila, a minimal rough eye phenotype caused by overexpression of Rac1, is dramatically enhanced by loss of function of CLC and LRRK2 homologues, confirming the importance of this pathway in vivo. Our data identify a new pathway in which CLCs function with LRRK2 to control Rac1 activation on endosomes, providing a new link between the clathrin machinery, the cytoskeleton and PD.
23055502	Mutations in parkin and LRRK2 together account for the majority of familial Parkinson's disease (PD) cases. Interestingly, recent evidence implicates the involvement of parkin and LRRK2 in mitochondrial homeostasis. Supporting this, we show here by means of the Drosophila model system that, like parkin, LRRK2 mutations induce mitochondrial pathology in flies when expressed in their flight muscles, the toxic effects of which can be rescued by parkin coexpression. When expressed specifically in fly dopaminergic neurons, mutant LRRK2 results in the appearance of significantly enlarged mitochondria, a phenotype that can also be rescued by parkin coexpression. Importantly, we also identified in this study that epigallocatechin gallate (EGCG), a green tea-derived catechin, acts as a potent suppressor of dopaminergic and mitochondrial dysfunction in both mutant LRRK2 and parkin-null flies. Notably, the protective effects of EGCG are abolished when AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) is genetically inactivated, suggesting that EGCG-mediated neuroprotection requires AMPK. Consistent with this, direct pharmacological or genetic activation of AMPK reproduces EGCG's protective effects. Conversely, loss of AMPK activity exacerbates neuronal loss and associated phenotypes in parkin and LRRK mutant flies. Together, our results suggest the relevance of mitochondrial-associated pathway in LRRK2 and parkin-related pathogenesis, and that AMPK activation may represent a potential therapeutic strategy for these familial forms of PD.
25080504	Mutations in the leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) gene cause late-onset autosomal dominant Parkinson's disease (PD), and sequence variations at the LRRK2 locus are associated with increased risk for sporadic PD. LRRK2 contains both GTPase and kinase domains flanked by protein interaction motifs, and mutations associated with familial PD have been described for both catalytic domains. LRRK2 has been implicated in diverse cellular processes, and recent evidence pinpoints to an important role for LRRK2 in modulating a variety of intracellular membrane trafficking pathways. However, the underlying mechanisms are poorly understood. Here, by studying the classical, well-understood, degradative trafficking pathway of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), we show that LRRK2 regulates endocytic membrane trafficking in an Rab7-dependent manner. Mutant LRRK2 expression causes a slight delay in early-to-late endosomal trafficking, and a pronounced delay in trafficking out of late endosomes, which become aberrantly elongated into tubules. This is accompanied by a delay in EGFR degradation. The LRRK2-mediated deficits in EGFR trafficking and degradation can be reverted upon coexpression of active Rab7 and of a series of proteins involved in bridging the EGFR to Rab7 on late endosomes. Effector pulldown assays indicate that pathogenic LRRK2 decreases Rab7 activity both in cells overexpressing LRRK2, as well as in fibroblasts from pathogenic mutant LRRK2 PD patients when compared with healthy controls. Together, these findings provide novel insights into a previously unknown regulation of Rab7 activity by mutant LRRK2 which impairs membrane trafficking at very late stages of the endocytic pathway.
28710481	Mutations in the Leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 gene (LRRK2) are associated with familial Parkinson's disease (PD). LRRK2 protein contains several functional domains, including protein-protein interaction domains at its N- and C-termini. In this study, we analyzed the functional features attributed to LRRK2 by its N- and C-terminal domains. We combined TIRF microscopy and synaptopHluorin assay to visualize synaptic vesicle trafficking. We found that N- and C-terminal domains have opposite impact on synaptic vesicle dynamics. Biochemical analysis demonstrated that different proteins are bound at the two extremities, namely beta3-Cav2.1 at N-terminus part and beta-Actin and Synapsin I at C-terminus domain. A sequence variant (G2385R) harboured within the C-terminal WD40 domain increases the risk for PD. Complementary biochemical and imaging approaches revealed that the G2385R variant alters strength and quality of LRRK2 interactions and increases fusion of synaptic vesicles. Our data suggest that the G2385R variant behaves like a loss-of-function mutation that mimics activity-driven events. Impaired scaffolding capabilities of mutant LRRK2 resulting in perturbed vesicular trafficking may arise as a common pathophysiological denominator through which different LRRK2 pathological mutations cause disease.
27790061	Mutation of leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) causes an autosomal dominant and late-onset familial Parkinson's disease (PD). Recently, we reported that LRRK2 directly binds to and phosphorylates the threonine 474 (T474)-containing Thr-X-Arg(Lys) (TXR) motif of focal adhesion kinase (FAK), thereby inhibiting the phosphorylation of FAK at tyrosine (Y) 397 residue (pY397-FAK), which is a marker of its activation. Mechanistically, however, it remained unclear how T474-FAK phosphorylation suppressed FAK activation. Here, we report that T474-FAK phosphorylation could inhibit FAK activation via at least two different mechanisms. First, T474 phosphorylation appears to induce a conformational change of FAK, enabling its N-terminal FERM domain to autoinhibit Y397 phosphorylation. This is supported by the observation that the levels of pY397-FAK were increased by deletion of the FERM domain and/or mutation of the FERM domain to prevent its interaction with the kinase domain of FAK. Second, pT474-FAK appears to recruit SHP-2, which is a phosphatase responsible for dephosphorylating pY397-FAK. We found that mutation of T474 into glutamate (T474E-FAK) to mimic phosphorylation induced more strong interaction with SHP-2 than WT-FAK, and that pharmacological inhibition of SHP-2 with NSC-87877 rescued the level of pY397 in HEK293T cells. These results collectively show that LRRK2 suppresses FAK activation through diverse mechanisms that include the promotion of autoinhibition and/or the recruitment of phosphatases, such as SHP-2.
27242426	Voltage-gated Ca(2+) (CaV) channels enable Ca(2+) influx in response to membrane depolarization. CaV2.1 channels are localized to the presynaptic membrane of many types of neurons where they are involved in triggering neurotransmitter release. Several signaling proteins have been identified as important CaV2.1 regulators including protein kinases, G-proteins and Ca(2+) binding proteins. Recently, we discovered that leucine rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2), a protein associated with inherited Parkinson's disease, interacts with specific synaptic proteins and influences synaptic transmission. Since synaptic proteins functionally interact with CaV2.1 channels and synaptic transmission is triggered by Ca(2+) entry via CaV2.1, we investigated whether LRRK2 could impact CaV2.1 channel function. CaV2.1 channel properties were measured using whole cell patch clamp electrophysiology in HEK293 cells transfected with CaV2.1 subunits and various LRRK2 constructs. Our results demonstrate that both wild type (wt) LRRK2 and the G2019S LRRK2 mutant caused a significant increase in whole cell Ca(2+) current density compared to cells expressing only the CaV2.1 channel complex. In addition, LRRK2 expression caused a significant hyperpolarizing shift in voltage-dependent activation while having no significant effect on inactivation properties. These functional changes in CaV2.1 activity are likely due to a direct action of LRRK2 as we detected a physical interaction between LRRK2 and the beta3 CaV channel subunit via coimmunoprecipitation. Furthermore, effects on CaV2.1 channel function are dependent on LRRK2 kinase activity as these could be reversed via treatment with a LRRK2 inhibitor. Interestingly, LRRK2 also augmented endogenous voltage-gated Ca(2+) channel function in PC12 cells suggesting other CaV channels could also be regulated by LRRK2. Overall, our findings support a novel physiological role for LRRK2 in regulating CaV2.1 function that could have implications for how mutations in LRRK2 contribute to Parkinson's disease pathophysiology.
26758690	BACKGROUND: Lrrk2, a gene linked to Parkinson's disease, encodes a large scaffolding protein with kinase and GTPase activities implicated in vesicle and cytoskeletal-related processes. At the presynaptic site, LRRK2 associates with synaptic vesicles through interaction with a panel of presynaptic proteins. RESULTS: Here, we show that LRRK2 kinase activity influences the dynamics of synaptic vesicle fusion. We therefore investigated whether LRRK2 phosphorylates component(s) of the exo/endocytosis machinery. We have previously observed that LRRK2 interacts with NSF, a hexameric AAA+ ATPase that couples ATP hydrolysis to the disassembling of SNARE proteins allowing them to enter another fusion cycle during synaptic exocytosis. Here, we demonstrate that NSF is a substrate of LRRK2 kinase activity. LRRK2 phosphorylates full-length NSF at threonine 645 in the ATP binding pocket of D2 domain. Functionally, NSF phosphorylated by LRRK2 displays enhanced ATPase activity and increased rate of SNARE complex disassembling. Substitution of threonine 645 with alanine abrogates LRRK2-mediated increased ATPase activity. CONCLUSIONS: Given that the most common Parkinson's disease LRRK2 G2019S mutation displays increased kinase activity, our results suggest that mutant LRRK2 may impair synaptic vesicle dynamics via aberrant phosphorylation of NSF.
26014385	Mutations in the leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) gene are known as the most frequent cause of familial Parkinson's disease (PD), but are also present in sporadic cases. The G2019S-LRRK2 mutation is located in the kinase domain of the protein, and has consistently been reported to promote a gain of kinase function. Several proteins have been reported as LRRK2 substrates and/or interactors, suggesting possible pathways involved in neurodegeneration in PD. Hyperphosphorylated Tau protein accumulates in neurofibrillary tangles, a typical pathological hallmark in Alzheimer's disease and frontotemporal dementia. In addition, it is also frequently found in the brains of PD patients. Although LRRK2 is a kinase, it appears that a putative interaction with Tau is phosphorylation-independent. However, the underlying mechanisms and the cellular consequences of this interaction are still unclear. In this study, we demonstrate an interaction between LRRK2 and Tau and that LRRK2 promotes the accumulation of non-monomeric and high-molecular weight (HMW) Tau species independent of its kinase activity. Interestingly, we found that LRRK2 increases Tau secretion, possibly as a consequence of an impairment of Tau proteasomal degradation. Our data highlight a mechanism through which LRRK2 regulates intracellular Tau levels, contributing to the progression of the pathology caused by the LRRK2-mediated proteasome impairment. In total, our findings suggest that the interplay between LRRK2 and proteasome activity might constitute a valid target for therapeutic intervention in PD.
25989799	Leucine-Rich Repeat Kinase 2 (LRRK2) is a large, multi-domain protein that has been found to be mutated in patients with familial and sporadic Parkinson's disease, Alzheimer's disease and Crohn's disease. While the functions of LRRK2 are still largely unclear and mutations in LRRK2 are associated with adverse gain-of-function activities such as increased kinase activity, increased levels of LRRK2 alone are associated with toxicity in neurons. Consequently, exploring mechanisms to decrease levels of LRRK2 using pharmacological inhibitors would be highly advantageous. Previous work has shown that the chaperone heat shock protein 90 (Hsp90) and its co-chaperone Cdc37 interact with and stabilize LRRK2. In the current study, we explore the regulation of LRRK2 by withaferin A (WA), a potent inhibitor of the interaction between Hsp90 and Cdc37. We report that treatment of the microglial cell line N9 with WA causes a decrease in cellular levels of LRRK2 in a dose- and time-dependent manner. We also find that treatment with WA disrupts the interaction between Hsp90, its co-chaperone Cdc37 and LRRK2, which leads to the destabilization and decreased levels of LRRK2. Additionally, treatment with celastrol, which is also an inhibitor of the Hsp90-Cdc37 complex, decreased LRRK2 levels. Interestingly, treatment with WA in the presence of celastrol enhanced the clearance of LRRK2. Overall, our data suggest that LRRK2 levels can be regulated by targeting the Hsp90-Cdc37 complex, which may have implications in the search for therapeutic strategies for Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease and other LRRK2 proteinopathies.
25500533	LRRK2, a gene relevant to Parkinson's disease, encodes a scaffolding protein with both GTPase and kinase activities. LRRK2 protein is itself phosphorylated and therefore is subject to regulation by cell signalling; however, the kinase(s) responsible for this event have not been definitively identified. Here using an unbiased siRNA kinome screen, we identify and validate casein kinase 1alpha (CK1alpha) as being responsible for LRRK2 phosphorylation, including in the adult mouse striatum. We further show that LRRK2 recruitment to TGN46-positive Golgi-derived vesicles is modulated by constitutive LRRK2 phosphorylation by CK1alpha. These effects are mediated by differential protein interactions of LRRK2 with a guanine nucleotide exchange factor, ARHGEF7. These pathways are therefore likely involved in the physiological maintenance of the Golgi in cells, which may play a role in the pathogenesis of Parkinson's disease.
24895406	Familial and idiopathic Parkinson's disease (PD) is associated with the abnormal neuronal accumulation of alpha-synuclein (aS) leading to beta-sheet-rich aggregates called Lewy Bodies (LBs). Moreover, single point mutation in aS gene and gene multiplication lead to autosomal dominant forms of PD. A connection between PD and the 14-3-3 chaperone-like proteins was recently proposed, based on the fact that some of the 14-3-3 isoforms can interact with genetic PD-associated proteins such as parkin, LRRK2 and aS and were found as components of LBs in human PD. In particular, a direct interaction between 14-3-3eta and aS was reported when probed by co-immunoprecipitation from cell models, from parkinsonian brains and by surface plasmon resonance in vitro. However, the mechanisms through which 14-3-3eta and aS interact in PD brains remain unclear. Herein, we show that while 14-3-3eta is unable to bind monomeric aS, it interacts with aS oligomers which occur during the early stages of aS aggregation. This interaction diverts the aggregation process even when 14-3-3eta is present in sub-stoichiometric amounts relative to aS. When aS level is overwhelmingly higher than that of 14-3-3eta, the fibrillation process becomes a sequestration mechanism for 14-3-3eta, undermining all processes governed by this protein. Using a panel of complementary techniques, we single out the stage of aggregation at which the aS/14-3-3eta interaction occurs, characterize the products of the resulting processes, and show how the processes elucidated in vitro are relevant in cell models. Our findings constitute a first step in elucidating the molecular mechanism of aS/14-3-3eta interaction and in understanding the critical aggregation step at which 14-3-3eta has the potential to rescue aS-induced cellular toxicity.
24778241	Membrane remodeling is controlled by proteins that can promote the formation of highly curved spherical or cylindrical membranes. How a protein induces these different types of membrane curvature and how cells regulate this process is still unclear. Endophilin A1 is a protein involved in generating endocytotic necks and vesicles during synaptic endocytosis and can transform large vesicles into lipid tubes or small and highly curved vesicles in vitro. By using EM and electron paramagnetic resonance of endophilin A1, we find that tubes are formed by a close interaction with endophilin A1's BIN/amphiphysin/Rvs (BAR) domain and deep insertion of its amphipathic helices. In contrast, vesicles are predominantly stabilized by the shallow insertion of the amphipathic helical wedges with the BAR domain removed from the membrane. By showing that the mechanism of membrane curvature induction is different for vesiculation and tubulation, these data also explain why previous studies arrived at different conclusions with respect to the importance of scaffolding and wedging in the membrane curvature generation of BAR proteins. The Parkinson disease-associated kinase LRRK2 phosphorylates S75 of endophilin A1, a position located in the acyl chain region on tubes and the aqueous environment on vesicles. We find that the phosphomimetic mutation S75D favors vesicle formation by inhibiting this conformational switch, acting to regulate endophilin A1-mediated curvature. As endophilin A1 is part of a protein superfamily, we expect these mechanisms and their regulation by posttranslational modifications to be a general means for controlling different types of membrane curvature in a wide range of processes in vivo.
20795948	Mutations in LRRK2 (leucine-rich repeat kinase 2) are the most common cause of familial PD (Parkinson's disease). Mutations that cause PD are found in either the GTPase or kinase domains of LRRK2 or an intervening sequence called the COR [C-terminus of ROC (Ras of complex proteins)] domain. As well as the two catalytic domains, LRRK2 possesses several protein-protein interaction domains, but their function and the proteins with which they interact are poorly understood. In this issue of the Biochemical Journal, Nichols et al. study the interaction of the N-terminal region of LRRK2 with 14-3-3 proteins, regulatory proteins that often bind to phosphorylated regions of components of cell signalling pathways. Using a combination of techniques, Nichols et al. have identified two residues (Ser910 and Ser935) that are critically responsible for 14-3-3 binding. The interaction of LRRK2 with 14-3-3 proteins can prevent dephosphorylation of Ser910/Ser935 and stabilize LRRK2 structure, perhaps by influencing the dimerization of LRRK2. The ability to interact with 14-3-3 correlates with the pattern of intracellular LRRK2 distribution. Collectively, these new results identify a potentially important regulatory mechanism of this complex protein and might provide ways to think about therapeutic opportunities for PD.
20173330	Increasing evidence supports a putative link between LRRK2 function and the MAP kinase cascades. We recently demonstrated that LRRK2 binds to MKK6, -3, and -7. Previous studies demonstrated that scaffold proteins are essential in the regulation of subcellular localization of stress kinase complexes. The c-jun NH2-terminal kinase (JNK)-interacting proteins (JIPs) are a group of scaffold proteins that play an important role in the regulation of MAP kinase signaling cascades. JIP1-3 are known to regulate the specificity and localization of the JNK pathway, while JIP4 is a specific scaffolding protein for the p38 pathway. We demonstrate that LRRK2 binds to JIP1-4, and is associated with increased levels of total JIP1, -3, -4, oligomeric JIP and ubiquitinated JIP. These results are consistent with a putative role of LRRK2 in regulating the stress kinase cascade.
19001729	OBJECTIVE: To isolate and identify the potential binding partners of LRRK2, a gene linked to both dominant familial form and sporadic form of Parkinson's disease, thus to further our knowledge of its function. METHODS: We used a sequence containing full-length of COR domain and part of ROC and MAPKKK domain as bait. The bait amplified by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) was then cloned into a yeast expression plasmid pGBKT7. After being sequenced and analyzed, pGBKT7-bait was transformed into the yeast strain AH109. Western blot was performed to confirm the expression of pGBKT7-bait in AH109 yeast strain. Then human fetal brain cDNA library was transformed into that yeast strain, which could express pGBKT7-bait fusion protein. The yeast strain which contained pGBKT7-bait and human fetal brain cDNA library was plated on quadruple dropout medium (SD/-Trp/-Leu/-His/-Ade) containing X-alpha-gal. We retested these positive colonies using 2 independent yeast strains AH109 contained pGBKT7-bait or pGBKT7, respectively. At last, these plasmids isolated from these true positive colonies were analyzed by bioinformatics. RESULTS: We obtained 9 true positive colonies, these colonies were sequenced, and we performed sequence Blast in GenBank. Three colonies of the 9 positive colonies were not in open reading-frames. Among other 6 colonies, there were known proteins including spermatid perinuclear RNA-binding protein (STRBP) and BCL2-associated athanogene 5 isoform b (BAG5), as well as unknown proteins including tyrosine phosphatase non-receptor type (PTPN23), l(3)mbt-like 3 isoform b (L3MBTL3), RALY RNA binding protein-like isoform 1 (RALYL), and Homo sapiens mRNA for KIAA1783 protein, partial cds (KIAA1783). CONCLUSION: True positive colonies of LRRK2 are successfully obtained by the yeast 2-hybrid. Our screened proteins may provide a new research clue for revealing biological functions of LRRK2, pathogenesis of Parkinson's disease, and other neurodegerations.
28553204	Leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) is a Ser/Thr kinase having mixed lineage kinase-like and GTPase domains, controlling neurite outgrowth and neuronal cell death. Evidence suggests that LRRK2 is involved in innate immune response signaling, but the underlying mechanism is yet unknown. A novel protein inhibitor of phosphatase 3B, RCAN1, is known to positively regulate inflammatory signaling through modulation of several intracellular targets of interleukins in immune cells. In the present study, we report that LRRK2 phosphorylates RCAN1 (RCAN1-1S) and is markedly up-regulated during interleukin-1beta (IL-1beta) treatment. During IL-1beta treatment, LRRK2-mediated phosphorylation of RCAN1 promoted the formation of protein complexes, including that between Tollip and RCAN1. LRRK2 decreased binding between Tollip and IRAK1, which was accompanied by increased formation of the IRAK1-TRAF6 complex. TAK1 activity was significantly enhanced by LRRK2. Furthermore, LRRK2 enhanced transcriptional activity of NF-kappaB and cytokine IL-8 production. These findings suggest that LRRK2 might be important in positively modulating IL-1beta-mediated signaling through selective phosphorylation of RCAN1.
28330897	Paneth cells play an important role in maintaining intestinal homeostasis by secreting a large number of antimicrobial peptides into the intestinal lumen. In this study, we found that Rip2 is required for lysozyme sorting in Paneth cells in a manner that is dependent on Nod2, LRRK2, and Rab2a. Rip2 deficiency in mouse led to lysosomal degradation of lysozyme in Paneth cells and prevented the recruitment of Rab2a onto dense core vesicles (DCVs). Like Nod2 and LRRK2, Rip2 localizes to DCVs in Paneth cells, and its DCV localization depends on Nod2 and LRRK2. Thus, we delineated a genetic pathway, consisting of Nod2-LRRK2-Rip2-Rab2a, which is required for lysozyme sorting. Taken together, our results indicate that the lysozyme-sorting process in Paneth cells is orchestrated by a number of host factors and highlight the importance of Paneth cell function in intestinal homeostasis.
26355680	Leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) is a key molecule in the pathogenesis of familial and idiopathic Parkinson's disease (PD). We have identified two novel LRRK2-associated proteins, a HECT-type ubiquitin ligase, HERC2, and an adaptor-like protein with six repeated Neuralized domains, NEURL4. LRRK2 binds to NEURL4 and HERC2 via the LRRK2 Ras of complex proteins (ROC) domain and NEURL4, respectively. HERC2 and NEURL4 link LRRK2 to the cellular vesicle transport pathway and Notch signaling, through which the LRRK2 complex promotes the recycling of the Notch ligand Delta-like 1 (Dll1)/Delta (Dl) through the modulation of endosomal trafficking. This process negatively regulates Notch signaling through cis-inhibition by stabilizing Dll1/Dl, which accelerates neural stem cell differentiation and modulates the function and survival of differentiated dopaminergic neurons. These effects are strengthened by the R1441G ROC domain-mutant of LRRK2. These findings suggest that the alteration of Notch signaling in mature neurons is a component of PD etiology linked to LRRK2.
26100023	Autophagy is a conserved process that enables catabolic and degradative pathways. Rab family proteins, which are active in the GTP-bound form, regulate the transport and fusion of autophagosomes. However, it remains unclear how each cycle of Rab activation and inactivation is precisely regulated. Here, we show that leucine-rich repeat kinase 1 (LRRK1) regulates autophagic flux by controlling Rab7 activity in autolysosome formation. Upon induction of autophagy, LRRK1 was recruited via an association with VAMP7 to the autolysosome, where it activated the Rab7 GTPase-activating protein (GAP) TBC1D2, thereby switching off Rab7 signaling. Consistent with this model, LRRK1 deletion caused mice to be vulnerable to starvation and disrupted autolysosome formation, as evidenced by the accumulation of enlarged autolysosomes with undegraded LC3-II and persistently high levels of Rab7-GTP. This defect in autophagic flux was partially rescued by a mutant form of TBC1D2 with elevated Rab7-GAP activity. Thus, the spatiotemporal regulation of Rab7 activity during tunicamycin-induced autophagy is regulated by LRRK1.
26009181	Mutations in the leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) gene comprise the most common cause of familial Parkinson's disease (PD), and variants increase the risk for sporadic PD. LRRK2 displays kinase and GTPase activity, and altered catalytic activity correlates with neurotoxicity, making LRRK2 a promising therapeutic target. Despite the importance of LRRK2 for disease pathogenesis, its normal cellular function, and the mechanism(s) by which pathogenic mutations cause neurodegeneration remain unclear. LRRK2 seems to regulate a variety of intracellular vesicular trafficking events to and from the late endosome in a manner dependent on various Rab proteins. At least some of those events are further regulated by LRRK2 in a manner dependent on two-pore channels (TPCs). TPCs are ionic channels localized to distinct endosomal structures and can cause localized calcium release from those acidic stores, with downstream effects on vesicular trafficking. Here, we review current knowledge about the link between LRRK2, TPC- and Rab-mediated vesicular trafficking to and from the late endosome, highlighting a possible cross-talk between endolysosomal calcium stores and Rab proteins underlying pathomechanism(s) in LRRK2-related PD.
25071441	LRRK2 is a protein that interacts with a plethora of signaling molecules, but the complexity of LRRK2 function presents a challenge for understanding the role of LRRK2 in the pathophysiology of Parkinson's disease (PD). Studies of LRRK2 using over-expression in transgenic mice have been disappointing, however, studies using invertebrate systems have yielded a much clearer picture, with clear effects of LRRK2 expression, knockdown or deletion in Caenorhabditis elegans and Drosophila on modulation of survival of dopaminergic neurons. Recent studies have begun to focus attention on particular signaling cascades that are a target of LRRK2 function. LRRK2 interacts with members of the mitogen activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway and might regulate the pathway action by acting as a scaffold that directs the location of MAPK pathway activity, without strongly affecting the amount of MAPK pathway activity. Binding to GTPases, GTPase-activating proteins and GTPase exchange factors are another strong theme in LRRK2 biology, with LRRK2 binding to rac1, cdc42, rab5, rab7L1, endoA, RGS2, ArfGAP1, and ArhGEF7. All of these molecules appear to feed into a function output for LRRK2 that modulates cytoskeletal outgrowth and vesicular dynamics, including autophagy. These functions likely impact modulation of alpha-synuclein aggregation and associated toxicity eliciting the disease processes that we term PD.
24947832	Genetic studies show that LRRK2, and not its closest paralogue LRRK1, is linked to Parkinson's disease. To gain insight into the molecular and cellular basis of this discrepancy, we searched for LRRK1- and LRRK2-specific cellular processes by identifying their distinct interacting proteins. A protein microarray-based interaction screen was performed with recombinant 3xFlag-LRRK1 and 3xFlag-LRRK2 and, in parallel, co-immunoprecipitation followed by mass spectrometry was performed from SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma cell lines stably expressing 3xFlag-LRRK1 or 3xFlag-LRRK2. We identified a set of LRRK1- and LRRK2-specific as well as common interactors. One of our most prominent findings was that both screens pointed to epidermal growth factor receptor (EGF-R) as a LRRK1-specific interactor, while 14-3-3 proteins were LRRK2-specific. This is consistent with phosphosite mapping of LRRK1, revealing phosphosites outside of 14-3-3 consensus binding motifs. To assess the functional relevance of these interactions, SH-SY5Y-LRRK1 and -LRRK2 cell lines were treated with LRRK2 kinase inhibitors that disrupt 14-3-3 binding, or with EGF, an EGF-R agonist. Redistribution of LRRK2, not LRRK1, from diffuse cytoplasmic to filamentous aggregates was observed after inhibitor treatment. Similarly, EGF induced translocation of LRRK1, but not of LRRK2, to endosomes. Our study confirms that LRRK1 and LRRK2 can carry out distinct functions by interacting with different cellular proteins. LRRK1 and LRRK2 (leucine-rich repeat kinase) interaction partners were identified by two different protein-protein interaction screens. These confirmed epidermal growth factor receptor (EGR-R) as a LRRK1-specific interactor, while 14-3-3 proteins were LRRK2-specific. Functional analysis of these interactions and the pathways they mediate shows that LRRK1 and LRRK2 signaling do not intersect, reflective of the differential role of both LRRKs in Parkinson's disease.
24788225	The leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) gene was discovered to encode a member of an evolutionarily conserved family of proteins marked by GTPase domains usually in combination with kinase domains. Missense mutations in both the kinase and GTPase domains in LRRK2 have been found to cause late-onset Parkinson's disease (PD). In this study, we investigated the effects of the LRRK2 on endothelial inflammation. We first demonstrated that the LRRK2 is expressed in endothelial cells. We also report here that IL-1beta can possibly increase LRRK2 expression in human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs). Wild-type LRRK2 (LRRK2(wt)) expression induces expression of vascular cell adhesion molecule 1 (VCAM-1) which is further exacerbated in cells expressing PD-associated LRRK2 G2019S mutants (LRRK2(G2019S)). Importantly, induction of VCAM-1 is almost completely blocked in cells expressing the GTP-binding-deficient mutant K1347A of LRRK2 (LRRK2(K1347A)). In addition, overexpression of LRRK2(wt) and LRRK2(G2019S) were found to cause an increase in monocyte attachment to endothelial cells. Mechanistically, we found that LRRK2 increases the transcriptional activity of nuclear factor kappaB (NF-kappaB) by increasing phosphorylation levels of IkappaBalpha. These findings suggest that inhibition of LRRK2 kinase activity may be a potential target for treatment of endothelial dysfunction.
24360742	Inflammatory mechanisms are activated in aging and late-onset neurodegenerative diseases, such as Parkinson's disease (PD). Mutations in leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) contribute to both idiopathic and familial forms of PD. Here, we investigated the involvement of LRRK2 in inflammatory pathways using primary dermal fibroblasts from patients with 2 common mutations in LRRK2 (G2019S and R1441G), idiopathic PD and age-matched healthy individuals. Basal cyclooxygenase (COX)-2 RNA levels were very high in the fibroblasts of all patients. Remarkably, LRRK2 silencing experiments significantly reduced basal COX-2 levels and COX-2 induction after a pro-inflammatory stimulus. Additionally, in samples from patients with the R1441G mutation and with idiopathic PD, we found a prominent cytoplasmic re-distribution of human antigen R, a protein that, among others, stabilizes COX-2 RNA. Furthermore, the response to lipopolysaccharide was defective in these 2 groups, which showed weak induction of pro-inflammatory cytokines and reduced NFkappaB transcriptional activation. In summary, we describe multiple defects in inflammatory pathways in which LRRK2 appears to be critically involved. Further studies are required to establish the therapeutic implications of inflammatory dysregulation in the pathophysiology of Parkinson's disease.
22723946	Mutations in leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) are strongly associated with late-onset autosomal dominant Parkinson's disease. LRRK2 is highly expressed in immune cells and recent work points towards a link between LRRK2 and innate immunity. Here we demonstrate that stimulation of the Toll-Like Receptor (TLR) pathway by MyD88-dependent agonists in bone marrow-derived macrophages (BMDMs) or RAW264.7 macrophages induces marked phosphorylation of LRRK2 at Ser910 and Ser935, the phosphorylation sites that regulate the binding of 14-3-3 to LRRK2. Phosphorylation of these residues is prevented by knock-out of MyD88 in BMDMs, but not the alternative TLR adaptor protein TRIF. Utilising both pharmacological inhibitors, including a new TAK1 inhibitor, NG25, and genetic models, we provide evidence that both the canonical (IKKalpha and IKKbeta) and IKK-related (IKKepsilon and TBK1) kinases mediate TLR agonist induced phosphorylation of LRRK2 in vivo. Moreover, all four IKK members directly phosphorylate LRRK2 at Ser910 and Ser935 in vitro. Consistent with previous work describing Ser910 and Ser935 as pharmacodynamic biomarkers of LRRK2 activity, we find that the TLR independent basal phosphorylation of LRRK2 at Ser910 and Ser935 is abolished following treatment of macrophages with LRRK2 kinase inhibitors. However, the increased phosphorylation of Ser910 and Ser935 induced by activation of the MyD88 pathway is insensitive to LRRK2 kinase inhibitors. Finally, employing LRRK2-deficient BMDMs, we present data indicating that LRRK2 does not play a major role in regulating the secretion of inflammatory cytokines induced by activation of the MyD88 pathway. Our findings provide the first direct link between LRRK2 and the IKKs that mediate many immune responses. Further work is required to uncover the physiological roles that phosphorylation of LRRK2 by IKKs play in controlling macrophage biology and to determine how phosphorylation of LRRK2 by IKKs impacts upon the use of Ser910 and Ser935 as pharmacodynamic biomarkers.
22171073	LRRK2 (PARK8) is the most common genetic determinant of Parkinson's disease (PD), with dominant mutations in LRRK2 causing inherited PD and sequence variation at the LRRK2 locus associated with increased risk for sporadic PD. Although LRRK2 has been implicated in diverse cellular processes encompassing almost all cellular compartments, the precise functions of LRRK2 remain unclear. Here, we show that the Drosophila homolog of LRRK2 (Lrrk) localizes to the membranes of late endosomes and lysosomes, physically interacts with the crucial mediator of late endosomal transport Rab7 and negatively regulates rab7-dependent perinuclear localization of lysosomes. We also show that a mutant form of lrrk analogous to the pathogenic LRRK2(G2019S) allele behaves oppositely to wild-type lrrk in that it promotes rather than inhibits rab7-dependent perinuclear lysosome clustering, with these effects of mutant lrrk on lysosome position requiring both microtubules and dynein. These data suggest that LRRK2 normally functions in Rab7-dependent lysosomal positioning, and that this function is disrupted by the most common PD-causing LRRK2 mutation, linking endolysosomal dysfunction to the pathogenesis of LRRK2-mediated PD.
21922152	Translational control is a crucial component of cancer development and progression. Eukaryotic initiation factor (eIF) 4E mediates eIF4F association with the mRNA 5' cap structure to stimulate cap-dependent translation initiation. The eIF4E-binding protein, 4E-BP1, regulates cap-dependent translation through its phosphorylation at multiple sites. It has been described that some human carcinomas present a high level of p-4E-BP1, not always associated with high levels of p-mTOR. These previous observations suggest that other kinases could be involved in 4E-BP1 phosporylation. Investigation in new kinases that could be implicated in 4E-BP1 phosphorylation and mechanisms that affect 4E-BP1 stability is important to understand the role of eIF4E in cell transformation. In this study, we examined 48 kinases that could be involved in 4E-BP1 phosphorylation and stability. The screening study was based on analysis of 4E-BP1 status after inhibition of these kinases in a breast carcinoma cell line. Several kinases affecting 4E-BP1 stability (LRRK2, RAF-1, p38gamma, GSK3beta, AMPKalpha, PRKACA and PRKACB) and 4E-BP1 phosphorylation (CDK1, PDK1, SRC, PRKCB1, PAK2, p38beta, PRKCA and CaMKKB) were identified. These findings provide evidence that 4E-BP1 can be regulated and stabilized by multiple kinases implicated in several cell signaling pathways. We focus on the finding that LRRK2 down-regulation was associated with a clearly decreased 4E-BP1 protein (and not with mRNA down-regulation). Importantly, knockdown of LRRK2 associated with high proliferative rate in normal cells and treatment with rapamycin and/or proteosome inhibition suppressed 4E-BP1 protein degradation. These results offer new insights into the regulation of total and phosphorylated 4E-BP1.
21695257	BACKGROUND: Dominant mutations in the leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) gene are the most prevalent cause of Parkinson's disease, however, little is known about the biological function of LRRK2 protein. LRRK2 is expressed in neural precursor cells suggesting a role in neurodevelopment. METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: In the present study, differential gene expression profiling revealed a faster silencing of pluripotency-associated genes, like Nanog, Oct4, and Lin28, during retinoic acid-induced neuronal differentiation of LRRK2-deficient mouse embryonic stem cells compared to wildtype cultures. By contrast, expression of neurotransmitter receptors and neurotransmitter release was increased in LRRK2+/- cultures indicating that LRRK2 promotes neuronal differentiation. Consistently, the number of neural progenitor cells was higher in the hippocampal dentate gyrus of adult LRRK2-deficient mice. Alterations in phosphorylation of the putative LRRK2 substrates, translation initiation factor 4E binding protein 1 and moesin, do not appear to be involved in altered differentiation, rather there is indirect evidence that a regulatory signaling network comprising retinoic acid receptors, let-7 miRNA and downstream target genes/mRNAs may be affected in LRRK2-deficient stem cells in culture. CONCLUSION/SIGNIFICANCE: Parkinson's disease-linked LRRK2 mutations that associated with enhanced kinase activity may affect retinoic acid receptor signaling during neurodevelopment and/or neuronal maintenance as has been shown in other mouse models of chronic neurodegenerative diseases.
21159966	Mutations in leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) are linked to familial as well as sporadic forms of Parkinson's disease (PD), a neurodegenerative disease characterized by dysfunction and degeneration of dopaminergic and other types of neurons. The molecular and cellular mechanisms underlying LRRK2 action remain poorly defined. Here, we show that LRRK2 controls synaptic morphogenesis at the Drosophila neuromuscular junction. Loss of Drosophila LRRK2 results in synaptic overgrowth, whereas overexpression of Drosophila LRRK or human LRRK2 has opposite effects. Alteration of LRRK2 activity also affects neurotransmission. LRRK2 exerts its effects on synaptic morphology by interacting with distinct downstream effectors at the presynaptic and postsynaptic compartments. At the postsynapse, LRRK2 interacts with the previously characterized substrate 4E-BP, an inhibitor of protein synthesis. At the presynapse, LRRK2 phosphorylates and negatively regulates the microtubule (MT)-binding protein Futsch. These results implicate synaptic dysfunction caused by deregulated protein synthesis and aberrant MT dynamics in LRRK2 pathogenesis and offer a new paradigm for understanding and ultimately treating PD.
19680143	Missense mutations in the leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) gene are the most common causes of both familial and sporadic forms of Parkinson disease and are also associated with diverse pathological alterations. The mechanisms whereby LRRK2 mutations cause these pathological phenotypes are unknown. We used immunohistochemistry with 3 distinct anti-LRRK2 antibodies to characterize the expression of LRRK2 in the brains of 21 subjects with various neurodegenerative disorders and 7 controls. The immunoreactivity of LRRK2 was localized in a subset of brainstem-type Lewy bodies (LBs) but not in cortical-type LBs, tau-positive inclusions, or TAR-DNA-binding protein-43-positive inclusions. The immunoreactivity of LRRK2 frequently appeared as enlarged granules or vacuoles within neurons of affected brain regions, including the substantia nigra, amygdala, and entorhinal cortex in patients with Parkinson disease or dementia with LBs. The volumes of LRRK2-positive granular structures in neurons of the entorhinal cortex were significantly increased in dementia with LBs brains compared with age-matched control brains (p < 0.05). Double immunolabeling demonstrated that these LRRK2-positive granular structures frequently colocalized with the late-endosomal marker Rab7B and occasionally with the lysosomal marker, the lysosomal-associated membrane protein 2. These results suggest that LRRK2 normally localizes to the endosomal-lysosomal compartment within morphologically altered neurons in neurodegenerative diseases, particularly in the brains of patients with LB diseases.
18701920	Dominant mutations in leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) are the most frequent molecular lesions so far found in Parkinson's disease (PD), an age-dependent neurodegenerative disorder affecting dopaminergic (DA) neuron. The molecular mechanisms by which mutations in LRRK2 cause DA degeneration in PD are not understood. Here, we show that both human LRRK2 and the Drosophila orthologue of LRRK2 phosphorylate eukaryotic initiation factor 4E (eIF4E)-binding protein (4E-BP), a negative regulator of eIF4E-mediated protein translation and a key mediator of various stress responses. Although modulation of the eIF4E/4E-BP pathway by LRRK2 stimulates eIF4E-mediated protein translation both in vivo and in vitro, it attenuates resistance to oxidative stress and survival of DA neuron in Drosophila. Our results suggest that chronic inactivation of 4E-BP by LRRK2 with pathogenic mutations deregulates protein translation, eventually resulting in age-dependent loss of DA neurons.
27863501	BACKGROUND: Mutations in leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) contribute to both familial and idiopathic forms of Parkinson's disease (PD). Neuroinflammation is a key event in neurodegeneration and aging, and there is mounting evidence of LRRK2 involvement in inflammatory pathways. In a previous study, we described an alteration of the inflammatory response in dermal fibroblasts from PD patients expressing the G2019S and R1441G mutations in LRRK2. METHODS: Taking advantage of cellular reprogramming, we generated induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC) lines and neurons thereafter, harboring LRRK2G2019S and LRRK2R1441G mutations. We used gene silencing and functional reporter assays to characterize the effect of the mutations. We examined the temporal profile of TNFalpha-induced changes in proteins of the NF-kappaB pathway and optimized western blot analysis to capture alpha-synuclein dynamics. The effects of the mutations and interventions were analyzed by two-way ANOVA tests with respect to corresponding controls. RESULTS: LRRK2 silencing decreased alpha-synuclein protein levels in mutated neurons and modified NF-kappaB transcriptional targets, such as PTGS2 (COX-2) and TNFAIP3 (A20). We next tested whether NF-kappaB and alpha-synuclein pathways converged and found that TNFalpha modulated alpha-synuclein levels, although we could not detect an effect of LRRK2 mutations, partly because of the individual variability. Nevertheless, we confirmed NF-kappaB dysregulation in mutated neurons, as shown by a protracted recovery of IkappaBalpha and a clear impairment in p65 nuclear translocation in the LRRK2 mutants. CONCLUSIONS: Altogether, our results show that LRRK2 mutations affect alpha-synuclein regulation and impair NF-kappaB canonical signaling in iPSC-derived neurons. TNFalpha modulated alpha-synuclein proteostasis but was not modified by the LRRK2 mutations in this paradigm. These results strengthen the link between LRRK2 and the innate immunity system underscoring the involvement of inflammatory pathways in the neurodegenerative process in PD.
27830463	The innate immune system is critical for clearing infection, and is tightly regulated to avert excessive tissue damage. Nod1/2-Rip2 signaling, which is essential for initiating the innate immune response to bacterial infection and ER stress, is subject to many regulatory mechanisms. In this study, we found that LRRK2, encoded by a gene implicated in Crohn's disease, leprosy and familial Parkinson's disease, modulates the strength of Nod1/2-Rip2 signaling by enhancing Rip2 phosphorylation. LRRK2 deficiency markedly reduces cytokine production in macrophages upon Nod2 activation by muramyl dipeptide (MDP), Nod1 activation by D-gamma-Glu-meso-diaminopimelic acid (iE-DAP) or ER stress. Our biochemical study shows that the presence of LRRK2 is necessary for optimal phosphorylation of Rip2 upon Nod2 activation. Therefore, this study reveals that LRRK2 is a new positive regulator of Rip2 and promotes inflammatory cytokine induction through the Nod1/2-Rip2 pathway.
27618216	Mitochondrial movements are tightly controlled to maintain energy homeostasis and prevent oxidative stress. Miro is an outer mitochondrial membrane protein that anchors mitochondria to microtubule motors and is removed to stop mitochondrial motility as an early step in the clearance of dysfunctional mitochondria. Here, using human induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC)-derived neurons and other complementary models, we build on a previous connection of Parkinson's disease (PD)-linked PINK1 and Parkin to Miro by showing that a third PD-related protein, LRRK2, promotes Miro removal by forming a complex with Miro. Pathogenic LRRK2G2019S disrupts this function, delaying the arrest of damaged mitochondria and consequently slowing the initiation of mitophagy. Remarkably, partial reduction of Miro levels in LRRK2G2019S human neuron and Drosophila PD models rescues neurodegeneration. Miro degradation and mitochondrial motility are also impaired in sporadic PD patients. We reveal that prolonged retention of Miro, and the downstream consequences that ensue, may constitute a central component of PD pathogenesis.
25501810	Mutations in leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) are associated with Parkinson's disease, but the precise physiological function of the protein remains ill-defined. Recently, our group proposed a model in which LRRK2 kinase activity is part of an EndoA phosphorylation cycle that facilitates efficient vesicle formation at synapses in the Drosophila melanogaster neuromuscular junctions.Flies harbor only one Lrrk gene, which might encompass the functions of both mammalian LRRK1 and LRRK2. We therefore studied the role of LRRK2 in mammalian synaptic function and provide evidence that knockout or pharmacological inhibition of LRRK2 results in defects in synaptic vesicle endocytosis, altered synaptic morphology and impairments in neurotransmission. In addition, our data indicate that mammalian endophilin A1 (EndoA1,also known as SH3GL2) is phosphorylated by LRRK2 in vitro at T73 and S75, two residues in the BAR domain. Hence, our results indicate that LRRK2 kinase activity has an important role in the regulation of clathrin-mediated endocytosis of synaptic vesicles and subsequent neurotransmission at the synapse.
22998870	LRRK2 is a kinase mutated in Parkinson's disease, but how the protein affects synaptic function remains enigmatic. We identified LRRK2 as a critical regulator of EndophilinA. Using genetic and biochemical studies involving Lrrk loss-of-function mutants and Parkinson-related LRRK2(G2019S) gain-of-kinase function, we show that LRRK2 affects synaptic endocytosis by phosphorylating EndoA at S75, a residue in the BAR domain. We show that LRRK2-mediated EndoA phosphorylation has profound effects on EndoA-dependent membrane tubulation and membrane association in vitro and in vivo and on synaptic vesicle endocytosis at Drosophila neuromuscular junctions in vivo. Our work uncovers a regulatory mechanism that indicates that reduced LRRK2 kinase activity facilitates EndoA membrane association, while increased kinase activity inhibits membrane association. Consequently, both too much and too little LRRK2-dependent EndoA phosphorylation impedes synaptic endocytosis, and we propose a model in which LRRK2 kinase activity is part of an EndoA phosphorylation cycle that facilitates efficient vesicle formation at synapses.
22393355	Activation of the forkhead box transcription factor FoxO is suggested to be involved in dopaminergic (DA) neurodegeneration in a Drosophila model of Parkinson's disease (PD), in which a PD gene product LRRK2 activates FoxO through phosphorylation. In the current study that combines Drosophila genetics and biochemical analysis, we show that cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP)-dependent kinase II (cGKII) also phosphorylates FoxO at the same residue as LRRK2, and Drosophila orthologues of cGKII and LRRK2, DG2/For and dLRRK, respectively, enhance the neurotoxic activity of FoxO in an additive manner. Biochemical assays using mammalian cGKII and FoxO1 reveal that cGKII enhances the transcriptional activity of FoxO1 through phosphorylation of the FoxO1 S319 site in the same manner as LRRK2. A Drosophila FoxO mutant resistant to phosphorylation by DG2 and dLRRK (dFoxO S259A corresponding to human FoxO1 S319A) suppressed the neurotoxicity and improved motor dysfunction caused by co-expression of FoxO and DG2. Nitric oxide synthase (NOS) and soluble guanylyl cyclase (sGC) also increased FoxO's activity, whereas the administration of a NOS inhibitor L-NAME suppressed the loss of DA neurons in aged flies co-expressing FoxO and DG2. These results strongly suggest that the NO-FoxO axis contributes to DA neurodegeneration in LRRK2-linked PD.
19176810	Neurodegenerative illnesses such as Parkinson and Alzheimer disease are an increasingly prevalent problem in aging societies, yet no therapies exist that retard or prevent neurodegeneration. Dominant missense mutations in leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) are the most common genetic cause of Parkinson disease (PD), but the mechanisms by which mutant forms of LRRK2 disrupt neuronal function and cause cell death remain poorly understood. We report that LRRK2 interacts with the death adaptor Fas-associated protein with death domain (FADD), and that in primary neuronal culture LRRK2-mediated neurodegeneration is prevented by the functional inhibition of FADD or depletion of caspase-8, two key elements of the extrinsic cell death pathway. This pathway is activated by disease-triggering mutations, which enhance the LRRK2-FADD association and the consequent recruitment and activation of caspase-8. These results establish a direct molecular link between a mutant PD gene and the activation of programmed cell death signaling, and suggest that FADD/caspase-8 signaling contributes to LRRK2-induced neuronal death.
17409193	Mutations in the gene coding for leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) cause autosomal-dominant Parkinson's disease. The pathological mutations have been associated with an increase of LRRK2 kinase activity, although its physiological substrates have not been identified yet. The data we report here demonstrate that disease-associated mutant LRRK2 cell toxicity is due to mitochondria-dependent apoptosis. Transient transfection of mutant LRRK2 leads to neuronal death with clear apoptotic signs. Soluble caspase inhibitors or the genetic ablation of Apaf1 protects cells from apoptotic death. Moreover, we explored the function of two protein domains in LRRK2 (LRR and WD40) and demonstrate that the lack of these protein domains has a protective effect on mitochondria dysfunctions induced by mutant LRRK2.
20457918	Mutations in leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) are the most common genetic cause of Parkinson's disease. LRRK2 is a large protein containing a small GTPase domain and a kinase domain, but its physiological role is unknown. To identify the normal function of LRRK2 in vivo, we generated two independent lines of germ-line deletion mice. The dopaminergic system of LRRK2(-/-) mice appears normal, and numbers of dopaminergic neurons and levels of striatal dopamine are unchanged. However, LRRK2(-/-) kidneys, which suffer the greatest loss of LRRK compared with other organs, develop striking accumulation and aggregation of alpha-synuclein and ubiquitinated proteins at 20 months of age. The autophagy-lysosomal pathway is also impaired in the absence of LRRK2, as indicated by accumulation of lipofuscin granules as well as altered levels of LC3-II and p62. Furthermore, loss of LRRK2 dramatically increases apoptotic cell death, inflammatory responses, and oxidative damage. Collectively, our findings show that LRRK2 plays an essential and unexpected role in the regulation of protein homeostasis during aging, and suggest that LRRK2 mutations may cause Parkinson's disease and cell death via impairment of protein degradation pathways, leading to alpha-synuclein accumulation and aggregation over time.
27890708	Dominantly inherited mutations in leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) are the most common causes of familial Parkinson's disease (PD) and LRRK2 polymorphisms are associated with increased risk for idiopathic PD. However, the molecular mechanisms by which these mutations cause PD remain uncertain. In vitro studies indicate that disease-linked mutations in LRRK2 increase LRRK2 kinase activity and LRRK2-mediated cell toxicity. Identifying LRRK2-interacting proteins and determining their effects on LRRK2 are important for understanding LRRK2 function and for delineating the pathophysiological mechanisms of LRRK2 mutations. Here we identified a novel protein, F-box and leucine-rich repeat domain-containing protein 18 (Fbxl18) that physically associates with LRRK2. We demonstrated that Fbxl18 is a component of a Skp1-Cullin1-F-box ubiquitin ligase complex that regulates the abundance of LRRK2 by selectively targeting phosphorylated LRRK2 for ubiquitination and proteasomal degradation. Knockdown of endogenous Fbxl18 stabilized LRRK2 abundance while protein kinase C activation enhanced LRRK2 degradation by Fbxl18. Dephosphorylation of LRRK2 blocked Fbxl18 association with LRRK2. Taken together, we have identified potential mechanisms for LRRK2 regulation by kinase signaling pathways. Furthermore, Fbxl18 prevented caspase activation and cell death caused by LRRK2 and PD-linked mutant LRRK2. This reveals novel targets for developing potential therapies for familial and idiopathic PD.
23754980	The importance of leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) to mature neurons is well-established, since mutations in PARK8, the gene encoding LRRK2, are the most common known cause of Parkinson's disease. Nonetheless, despite the LRRK2 knockout mouse having no overt neurodevelopmental defect, numerous lines of in vitro data point toward a central role for this protein in neurogenesis. Roles for LRRK2 have been described in many key processes, including neurite outgrowth and the regulation of microtubule dynamics. Moreover, LRRK2 has been implicated in cell cycle control, suggesting additional roles in neurogenesis that precede terminal differentiation. However, we contend that the suggested function of LRRK2 as a scaffolding protein at the heart of numerous Wnt signaling cascades provides the most tantalizing link to neurogenesis in the developing brain. Numerous lines of evidence show a critical requirement for multiple Wnt pathways in the development of certain brain regions, not least the dopaminergic neurons of the ventral mid-brain. In conclusion, these observations indicate a function of LRRK2 as a subtle yet critical mediator of the action of Wnt ligands on developing neurons. We suggest that LRRK2 loss- or gain-of-function are likely modifiers of developmental phenotypes seen in animal models of Wnt signaling deregulation, a hypothesis that can be tested by cross-breeding relevant genetically modified experimental strains.
22230652	BACKGROUND: Dominantly inherited missense mutations in leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) are the most common genetic cause of Parkinson's disease, but its normal physiological function remains unclear. We previously reported that loss of LRRK2 causes impairment of protein degradation pathways as well as increases of apoptotic cell death and inflammatory responses in the kidney of aged mice. RESULTS: Our analysis of LRRK2-/- kidneys at multiple ages, such as 1, 4, 7, and 20 months, revealed unique age-dependent development of a variety of molecular, cellular, and ultrastructural changes. Gross morphological abnormalities of the kidney, including altered size, weight, texture, and color, are evident in LRRK2-/- mice at 3-4 months of age, along with increased accumulation of autofluorescent granules in proximal renal tubules. The ratio of kidney/body weight in LRRK2-/- mice is increased at 1, 4, and 7 months of age (-10% at 1 month, and -20% at 4 and 7 months), whereas the ratio is drastically decreased at 20 months of age (-50%). While kidney filtration function evaluated by levels of blood urea nitrogen and serum creatinine is not significantly affected in LRRK2-/- mice at 12-14 months of age, expression of kidney injury molecule-1, a sensitive and specific biomarker for epithelial cell injury of proximal renal tubules, is up-regulated (-10-fold). Surprisingly, loss of LRRK2 causes age-dependent bi-phasic alterations of the autophagic activity in LRRK2-/- kidneys, which is unchanged at 1 month of age, enhanced at 7 months but reduced at 20 months, as evidenced by corresponding changes in the levels of LC3-I/II, a reliable autophagy marker, and p62, an autophagy substrate. Levels of alpha-synuclein and protein carbonyls, a general oxidative damage marker, are also decreased in LRRK2-/- kidneys at 7 months of age but increased at 20 months. Interestingly, the age-dependent bi-phasic alterations in autophagic activity in LRRK2-/- kidneys is accompanied by increased levels of lysosomal proteins and proteases at 1, 7, and 20 months of age as well as progressive accumulation of autolysosomes and lipofuscin granules at 4, 7-10, and 20 months of age. CONCLUSIONS: LRRK2 is important for the dynamic regulation of autophagy function in vivo.
27731364	Leucine rich repeat kinase 2 is a complex enzyme with both kinase and GTPase activities, closely linked to the pathogenesis of several human disorders including Parkinson's disease, Crohn's disease, leprosy and cancer. LRRK2 has been implicated in numerous cellular processes; however its physiological function remains unclear. Recent reports suggest that LRRK2 can act to regulate the cellular catabolic process of macroautophagy, although the precise mechanism whereby this occurs has not been identified. To investigate the signalling events through which LRRK2 acts to influence macroautophagy, the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR)/Unc-51-like kinase 1 (ULK1) and Beclin-1/phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) pathways were evaluated in astrocytic cell models in the presence and absence of LRRK2 kinase inhibitors. Chemical inhibition of LRRK2 kinase activity resulted in the stimulation of macroautophagy in a non-canonical fashion, independent of mTOR and ULK1, but dependent upon the activation of Beclin 1-containing class III PI3-kinase.
28821568	Although genetic polymorphisms in the LRRK2 gene are associated with a variety of diseases, the physiological function of LRRK2 remains poorly understood. In this study, we report a crucial role for LRRK2 in the activation of the NLRC4 inflammasome during host defense against Salmonella enteric serovar Typhimurium infection. LRRK2 deficiency reduced caspase-1 activation and IL-1beta secretion in response to NLRC4 inflammasome activators in macrophages. Lrrk2-/- mice exhibited impaired clearance of pathogens after acute S. Typhimurium infection. Mechanistically, LRRK2 formed a complex with NLRC4 in the macrophages, and the formation of the LRRK2-NLRC4 complex led to the phosphorylation of NLRC4 at Ser533. Importantly, the kinase activity of LRRK2 is required for optimal NLRC4 inflammasome activation. Collectively, our study reveals an important role for LRRK2 in the host defense by promoting NLRC4 inflammasome activation.
28482024	Mutations of the retromer component Vps35 and endosomal kinase LRRK2 are linked to autosomal dominant forms of familial Parkinson's disease (PD). However, the physiological and pathological roles of Vps35 and LRRK2 in neuronal functions are poorly understood. Here, we demonstrated that the loss of Drosophila Vps35 (dVps35) affects synaptic vesicle recycling, dopaminergic synaptic release and sleep behavior associated with dopaminergic activity, which is rescued by the expression of wild-type dVps35 but not the PD-associated mutant dVps35 D647N. Drosophila LRRK2 dLRRK together with Rab5 and Rab11 is also implicated in synaptic vesicle recycling, and the manipulation of these activities improves the Vps35 synaptic phenotypes. These findings indicate that defects of synaptic vesicle recycling in which two late-onset PD genes, Vps35 and LRRK2, are involved could be key aspects of PD etiology.
27542736	The wsb1 gene has been identified to be important in developmental biology and cancer. A complex transcriptional regulation of wsb1 yields at least three functional transcripts. The major expressed isoform, WSB1 protein, is a substrate recognition protein within an E3 ubiquitin ligase, with the capability to bind diverse targets and mediate ubiquitinylation and proteolytic degradation. Recent data suggests a new role for WSB1 as a component of a neuroprotective pathway which results in modification and aggregation of neurotoxic proteins such as LRRK2 in Parkinson's Disease, via an unusual mode of protein ubiquitinylation.WSB1 is also involved in thyroid hormone homeostasis, immune regulation and cellular metabolism, particularly glucose metabolism and hypoxia. In hypoxia, wsb1 is a HIF-1 target, and is a regulator of the degradation of diverse proteins associated with the cellular response to hypoxia, including HIPK2, RhoGDI2 and VHL. Major roles are to both protect HIF-1 function through degradation of VHL, and decrease apoptosis through degradation of HIPK2. These activities suggest a role for wsb1 in cancer cell proliferation and metastasis. As well, recent work has identified a role for WSB1 in glucose metabolism, and perhaps in mediating the Warburg effect in cancer cells by maintaining the function of HIF1. Furthermore, studies of cancer specimens have identified dysregulation of wsb1 associated with several types of cancer, suggesting a biologically relevant role in cancer development and/or progression.Recent development of an inducible expression system for wsb1 could aid in the further understanding of the varied functions of this protein in the cell, and roles as a potential oncogene and neuroprotective protein.
23937259	A cluster of phosphorylation sites in LRRK2 (leucine-rich repeat kinase 2), including Ser910, Ser935, Ser955 and Ser973, is important for PD (Parkinson's disease) pathogenesis as several PD-linked LRRK2 mutants are dephosphorylated at these sites. LRRK2 is also dephosphorylated in cells after pharmacological inhibition of its kinase activity, which is currently proposed as a strategy for disease-modifying PD therapy. Despite this importance of LRRK2 dephosphorylation in mutant LRRK2 pathological mechanism(s) and in LRRK2's response to inhibition, the mechanism by which this occurs is unknown. Therefore we aimed to identify the phosphatase for LRRK2. Using a panel of recombinant phosphatases, we found that PP1 (protein phosphatase 1) efficiently dephosphorylates LRRK2 in vitro. PP1 activity on LRRK2 dephosphorylation was confirmed in cells using PP1 inhibition to reverse LRRK2 dephosphorylation induced by the potent LRRK2 kinase inhibitor LRRK2-IN1 as well as in R1441G mutant LRRK2. We also found that PP1 and LRRK2 can form a complex in cells. Furthermore, we observed that PP1 inhibition modulates LRRK2's cellular phenotype by reducing skein-like LRRK2-positive structures associated with dephosphorylation. In conclusion, the present study reveals PP1 as the physiological LRRK2 phosphatase, responsible for LRRK2 dephosphorylation observed in PD mutant LRRK2 and after LRRK2 kinase inhibition.
28647363	The Ca2+-dependent activator protein for secretion 2 (CADPS2) is a member of the CAPS/CADPS protein family that plays crucial roles in synaptic vesicle dynamics. Genomic variability in the CADPS2 gene has been associated to autism spectrum disorders and Alzheimer's disease, both characterized by altered neurotransmission. Biological evidence also linked CADPS2 to Parkinson's disease (PD), as a disease-causing mutation in leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) was reported to increase CADPS2 gene and protein expression. Furthermore, restoration of CADPS2 physiologic levels was able to provide neuroprotection in patient-derived neurons, consistent with the synaptic dysfunction postulated to underlie PD. However, little is known about the influence of PD-related proteins on transcriptional regulation of critical synaptic genes such as CADPS2. Here we aimed at investigating the transcriptional effects of LRRK2 and alpha-synuclein (aSyn) on CADPS2 gene expression, using a combination of in silico analyses and cell biology techniques. First, we identified a predicted promoter in the human CADPS2 genomic sequence, which we then utilized in a luciferase-based gene reporter assay. This approach enabled us to disclose a differential effect of high levels of LRRK2 and aSyn on CADPS2 promoter activity. Specifically, CADPS2 transcriptional activity was enhanced by high cellular levels of LRRK2 and reduced by overexpression of aSyn. Consistently, CADPS2 mRNA levels were diminished in aSyn overexpressing cells. Our results indicate that LRRK2 and aSyn participate in the dysregulation of CADPS2 by altering transcription and support the hypothesis that synaptic dysfunctions, through different mechanisms, might contribute to the neuronal defects of diseases such as PD.
28529829	The neurodegenerative movement disorder Parkinson disease (PD) is prevalent in the aged population. However, the underlying mechanisms that trigger disease are unclear. Increasing work implicates both impaired Ca2+ signalling and lysosomal dysfunction in neuronal demise. Here I aim to connect these distinct processes by exploring the evidence that lysosomal Ca2+ signalling is disrupted in PD. In particular, I highlight defects in lysosomal Ca2+ content and signalling through NAADP-regulated two-pore channels in patient fibroblasts harbouring mutations in the PD-linked genes, GBA1 and LRRK2. As an emerging contributor to PD pathogenesis, the lysosomal Ca2+ signalling apparatus could represent a novel therapeutic target.
28222538	Mutations in the vacuolar protein sorting 35 ortholog (VPS35) gene encoding a core component of the retromer complex, have recently emerged as a new cause of late-onset, autosomal dominant familial Parkinson's disease (PD). A single missense mutation, AspD620Asn (D620N), has so far been unambiguously identified to cause PD in multiple individuals and families worldwide. The exact molecular mechanism(s) by which VPS35 mutations induce progressive neurodegeneration in PD are not yet known. Understanding these mechanisms, as well as the perturbed cellular pathways downstream of mutant VPS35, is important for the development of appropriate therapeutic strategies. In this review, we focus on the current knowledge surrounding VPS35 and its role in PD. We provide a critical discussion of the emerging data regarding the mechanisms underlying mutant VPS35-mediated neurodegeneration gleaned from genetic cell and animal models and highlight recent advances that may provide insight into the interplay between VPS35 and several other PD-linked gene products (i.e. alpha-synuclein, LRRK2 and parkin) in PD. Present data support a role for perturbed VPS35 and retromer function in the pathogenesis of PD.
20671708	Gain-of-function mutations in leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) cause familial as well as sporadic Parkinson's disease characterized by age-dependent degeneration of dopaminergic neurons. The molecular mechanism of LRRK2 action is not known. Here we show that LRRK2 interacts with the microRNA (miRNA) pathway to regulate protein synthesis. Drosophila e2f1 and dp messenger RNAs are translationally repressed by let-7 and miR-184*, respectively. Pathogenic LRRK2 antagonizes these miRNAs, leading to the overproduction of E2F1/DP, previously implicated in cell cycle and survival control and shown here to be critical for LRRK2 pathogenesis. Genetic deletion of let-7, antagomir-mediated blockage of let-7 and miR-184* action, transgenic expression of dp target protector, or replacement of endogenous dp with a dp transgene non-responsive to let-7 each had toxic effects similar to those of pathogenic LRRK2. Conversely, increasing the level of let-7 or miR-184* attenuated pathogenic LRRK2 effects. LRRK2 associated with Drosophila Argonaute-1 (dAgo1) or human Argonaute-2 (hAgo2) of the RNA-induced silencing complex (RISC). In aged fly brain, dAgo1 protein level was negatively regulated by LRRK2. Further, pathogenic LRRK2 promoted the association of phospho-4E-BP1 with hAgo2. Our results implicate deregulated synthesis of E2F1/DP caused by the miRNA pathway impairment as a key event in LRRK2 pathogenesis and suggest novel miRNA-based therapeutic strategies.
17639429	Mutations in the leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 gene (LRRK2) have been identified in families with autosomal dominant late-onset Parkinson disease (PD). Lrrk2 is a phylogenetically conserved, ubiquitous protein, which is constitutively expressed in various cells including neurons and glial cells of human brain. We recently reported that Lrrk2 is identified in Lewy bodies in PD as well as in neuronal and glial inclusions in several other neurodegenerative disorders. Here we show that Lrrk2 is closely associated with the tau-positive inclusions in eight members of a family with frontotemporal dementia of the pallido-ponto-nigral degeneration type linked to the chromosome 17 N279K tau mutation (N279K/FTDP-17/PPND). Lrrk2 is colocalized with tau in oligodendroglial coiled bodies and intracytoplasmic neuronal inclusions. HLA-DR positive reactive microglia and ICAM-1 positive reactive astrocytes accumulated in affected areas demonstrating that inflammatory processes are also involved in the disease pathogenesis. Western blot analysis of soluble extracts of N279K/FTDP-17/PPND brain tissue suggests that C-terminal fragment(s) of apparent 64-75 kDa molecular weight may be the major Lrrk2 species in pathological deposits. The possibility that Lrrk2 is linked with various neurodegenerative disorders through the ubiquitin proteosome pathway is discussed. The results indicate that Lrrk2 is linked to frontotemporal atrophy of PPND type caused by N279K tau mutation. They also show that chronic inflammation is involved in the pathogenesis of N279K/FTDP-17/PPND.
19878656	Mutations of the leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) gene are the leading cause of genetically inherited Parkinson's disease (PD) and its more severe variant diffuse Lewy body disease (DLB). Pathological mutations in Lrrk2 are autosomal dominant, suggesting a gain of function. Mutations in alpha-synuclein also produce autosomal dominant disease. Here we report an interaction between Lrrk2 and alpha-synuclein in a series of diffuse Lewy body (DLB) cases and in an oxidative stress cell based assay. All five cases of DLB, but none of five controls, showed co-immunoprecipitation of Lrrk2 and alpha-synuclein in soluble brain extracts. Colocalization was also found in pathological deposits in DLB postmortem brains by double immunostaining. In HEK cells transfected simultaneously with plasmids expressing Lrrk2 and alpha-synuclein, co-immunoprecipitation of Lrrk2 and alpha-synuclein was detected when they were exposed to oxidative stress by H(2)O(2). Taken together, these results suggest the possibility that in PD and related synucleinopathies, oxidative stress upregulates alpha-syn and Lrrk2 expression, paving the way for pathological interactions. New therapeutic approaches to PD and the synucleinopathies may result from limiting the interaction between Lrrk2 and alpha-synuclein.
28598236	The knowledge gap separating the molecular and cellular underpinnings of Parkinson disease (PD) and its pathology hinders treatment innovation. Adding to this difficulty is the lack of a reliable biomarker for PD. Our previous studies identify a link of 2 PD proteins, PINK1/PRKN Parkin to a mitochondrial motor adaptor RHOT1/Miro-1, which mediates mitochondrial motility and mitophagy. Here we review our recent paper showing that a third PD protein, LRRK2, also targets RHOT1 and regulates mitophagy, and pathogenic LRRK2 disrupts this function. Notably, we discover impairments in RHOT1 and mitophagy in sporadic PD patients with no known genetic backgrounds, pointing to RHOT1-mediated mitophagy as a convergent pathway in PD. This novelty opens new doors in PD research toward RHOT1-based therapy and biomarker development.
28453723	Mutations in leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) comprise the most common cause of familial Parkinson's disease (PD), and sequence variants modify risk for sporadic PD. Previous studies indicate that LRRK2 interacts with microtubules (MTs) and alters MT-mediated vesicular transport processes. However, the molecular determinants within LRRK2 required for such interactions have remained unknown. Here, we report that most pathogenic LRRK2 mutants cause relocalization of LRRK2 to filamentous structures which colocalize with a subset of MTs, and an identical relocalization is seen upon pharmacological LRRK2 kinase inhibition. The pronounced colocalization with MTs does not correlate with alterations in LRRK2 kinase activity, but rather with increased GTP binding. Synthetic mutations which impair GTP binding, as well as LRRK2 GTP-binding inhibitors profoundly interfere with the abnormal localization of both pathogenic mutant as well as kinase-inhibited LRRK2. Conversely, addition of a non-hydrolyzable GTP analog to permeabilized cells enhances the association of pathogenic or kinase-inhibited LRRK2 with MTs. Our data elucidate the mechanism underlying the increased MT association of select pathogenic LRRK2 mutants or of pharmacologically kinase-inhibited LRRK2, with implications for downstream MT-mediated transport events.
28168579	BACKGROUND: Leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) is a recently discovered molecule associated with familial and sporadic Parkinson's disease. It regulates many central neuronal functions such as cell proliferation, apoptosis, autophagy, and axonal extension. However, in contrast to the well-documented function of LRRK2 in central neurons, it is unclear whether LRRK2 is expressed in enteric neurons and affects the physiology of the gut. AIMS: By examining LRRK2-KO mice, this study investigated whether enteric neurons express LRRK2 and whether intestinal neuronal peptides and IgA are quantitatively changed. METHODS: Intestinal protein lysates and sections prepared from male C57BL/6 J mice were analyzed by Western blotting and immunostaining using anti-LRRK2 antibody, respectively. Intestinal neuronal peptide-mRNAs were quantified by real-time PCR in wild-type mice and LRRK2-KO mice. Intestinal IgA was quantified by ELISA. Lamina propria mononuclear cells (LPMCs) were analyzed by flow cytometry to evaluate the ratio of B1 to B2 B cells. RESULTS: Western analysis and immunostaining revealed that LRRK2 is expressed in enteric neurons. The amounts of mRNA for vasoactive intestinal peptide, neuropeptide Y, and substance P were increased in LRRK2-KO mice accompanied by an increment of IgA. However, the intestinal B cell subpopulations were not altered in LRRK2-KO mice. CONCLUSIONS: For the first time, we have revealed that LRRK2 is expressed in enteric neurons and related to quantitative alterations of neuronal peptide and IgA. Our study highlights the importance of LRRK2 in enteric neurons as well as central neurons.
27812199	Mutations in Leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) are strongly associated with familial Parkinson's disease (PD). High expression levels in immune cells suggest a role of LRRK2 in regulating the immune system. In this study, we investigated the effect of the LRRK2 (G2019S) mutation in monocytes, using a human stem cell-derived model expressing LRRK2 at endogenous levels. We discovered alterations in the differentiation pattern of LRRK2 mutant, compared to non-mutant isogenic controls, leading to accelerated monocyte production and a reduction in the non-classical CD14+CD16+ monocyte subpopulation in the LRRK2 mutant cells. LPS-treatment of the iPSC-derived monocytes significantly increased the release of pro-inflammatory cytokines, demonstrating a functional response without revealing any significant differences between the genotypes. Assessment of the migrational capacity of the differentiated monocytes revealed moderate deficits in LRRK2 mutant cells, compared to their respective controls. Our findings indicate a pivotal role of LRRK2 in hematopoietic fate decision, endorsing the involvement of the immune system in the development of PD.
27423549	BACKGROUND/PURPOSE: Leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) is a large protein encoding multiple functional domains. Mutations within different LRRK2 domains have been considered to be involved in the development of Parkinson disease by different mechanisms. Our previous study found three LRRK2 mutations-p.R767H, p.S885N, and p.R1441H-in Taiwanese patients with Parkinson disease. METHODS: We evaluated the functional properties of LRRK2 p.R767H, p.S885N, and p.R1441H mutations by overexpressing them in human embryonic kidney 293 and neuroblastoma SK-N-SH cells. The common p.G2019S mutation in the kinase domain was included for comparison. RESULTS: In 293 cells, overexpressed p.R1441H-but not p.R767H, p.S885N, or p.G2019-increased GTP binding affinity to prolong the active state. Overexpressed p.R1441H and p.G2019S generated inclusions in 293 cells. In SK-N-SH cells, the alpha-synuclein was coexpressed with wild type as well as mutated p.R767H, p.S885N, p.R1441H, and p.G2019 LRRK2 proteins. Part of the perinuclear inclusions formed by p.R1441H and p.G2019S were colocalized with alpha-synuclein. Additionally, p.S885N and p.R1441H mutations caused reduced interaction between LRRK2 and ARHGEF7, a putative guanine nucleotide exchange factor for LRRK2, whereas this interaction was well preserved in p.R767H and p.G2019S mutations. CONCLUSION: Our study suggests that p.R1441H protein facilitates the formation of intracellular inclusions, compromises GTP hydrolysis by increasing its affinity for GTP, and reduces its interaction with ARHGEF7.
27394417	Leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) has been implicated in oxidative stress (OS) and neurodegeneration in Parkinson's disease (PD). However, the pathophysiological mechanism of the LRRK2 kinase in neurons under stress stimuli is not yet understood. We demonstrate that rotenone (ROT), a mitochondria complex I inhibitor frequently used to generate in vitro and in vivo experimental models of PD, induces LRRK2 phosphorylation at serine 935 p-(S935) concomitant with cell death in nerve-like differentiated cells (NLCs). Indeed, ROT (50 microM) at 6 h exposure significantly increased reactive oxygen species (ROS) (~100 %), p-(S935)-LRRK2 kinase [~2 f(old)-(i)ncrease] level, induced nuclei condensation/fragmentation (16 %), increased the expression of NF-kappaB (5.6 f-i), p53 (5.3 f-i), c-Jun (5.4 f-i) transcription factors, activated caspase-3 (8.0 f-i) and AIF (6.8 f-i) proteins; but significantly decreased mitochondrial membrane potential (Psim, ~21 %), indicative of apoptosis -a type of regulated cell death process- compared to untreated cells. Strikingly, the LRRK2 kinase inhibitor PF-06447475 (PF-475, 1 microM) protects NLCs against ROT induced noxious effect. The inhibitor not only blocked the p-(S935)-LRRK2 kinase phosphorylation but also completely abolished ROS, and significantly reversed all ROT-induced apoptosis signaling and OS associated markers to comparable control values. We conclude that wild-type LRRK2 may act as a pro-apoptotic factor under OS stimuli. Our findings suggest an association between OS and LRRK2 phosphorylation in the NLCs death process, as PD model. Therefore, the pharmacological inhibition of LRRK2 might help to understand the OS-mediated kinase activation in PD neurodegenerative disorder.
26853528	Mutations in LRRK2 are linked to autosomal dominant forms of Parkinson's disease. We identified two human proteins that bind to LRRK2: BAG2 and HSC70, which are known to form a chaperone complex. We characterized the role of their Caenorhabditis elegans homologues, UNC-23 and HSP-1, in the regulation of LRK-1, the sole homologue of human LRRK2. In C. elegans, LRK-1 determines the polarized sorting of synaptic vesicle (SV) proteins to the axons by excluding SV proteins from the dendrite-specific transport machinery in the Golgi. In unc-23 mutants, SV proteins are localized to both presynaptic and dendritic endings in neurons, a phenotype also observed in lrk-1 deletion mutants. Furthermore, we isolated mutations in the hsp-1 gene that can suppress the unc-23, but not the lrk-1 defect. We show that UNC-23 determines LRK-1 localization to the Golgi apparatus in cooperation with HSP-1. These results describe a chaperone-dependent mechanism through which LRK-1 localization is regulated.
25724482	One of the main pathways of lysosomal proteolysis is chaperone-mediated autophagy (CMA), which represents a selective mechanism for the degradation of specific soluble proteins within lysosomes. Along with the other two lysosomal pathways, macro- and micro-autophagy, CMA contributes to cellular quality control through the removal of damaged or malfunctioning proteins. The two intrinsic characteristics of CMA are the selective targeting and the direct translocation of substrate proteins into the lysosomal lumen, in a fine-tuned manner through the orchestrated action of a chaperone/co-chaperone complex localized both at the cytosol and the lysosomes. Even though CMA was originally identified as a stress-induced pathway, basal CMA activity is detectable in most cell types analyzed so far, including neurons. Additionally, CMA activity declines with age and this may become a major aggravating factor contributing to neurodegeneration. More specifically, it has been suggested that CMA impairment may underlie the accumulation of misfolded/aggregated proteins, such as alpha-synuclein or LRRK2, whose levels or conformations are critical to Parkinson's disease pathogenesis. On the other hand, CMA induction might accelerate clearance of pathogenic proteins and promote cell survival, suggesting that CMA represents a viable therapeutic target for the treatment of various proteinopathies. In the current review, we provide an overview of the current state of knowledge regarding the role of CMA under physiological and pathological conditions of the nervous system and discuss the implications of these findings for therapeutic interventions for Parkinson's disease and other neurodegenerative disorders. This article is part of Special Issue entitled "Neuronal Protein".
22204929	BACKGROUND: Mutations in LRRK2 are associated with familial and sporadic Parkinson's disease (PD). Subjects with PD caused by LRRK2 mutations show pleiotropic pathology that can involve inclusions containing alpha-synuclein, tau or neither protein. The mechanisms by which mutations in LRRK2 lead to this pleiotropic pathology remain unknown. OBJECTIVES: To investigate mechanisms by which LRRK2 might cause PD. METHODS: We used systems biology to investigate the transcriptomes from human brains, human blood cells and Caenorhabditis elegans expressing wild-type LRRK2. The role of autophagy was tested in lines of C. elegans expressing LRRK2, V337M tau or both proteins. Neuronal function was measured by quantifying thrashing. RESULTS: Genes regulating autophagy were coordinately regulated with LRRK2. C. elegans expressing V337M tau showed reduced thrashing, as has been noted previously. Coexpressing mutant LRRK2 (R1441C or G2019S) with V337M tau increased the motor deficits. Treating the lines of C. elegans with an mTOR inhibitor that enhances autophagic flux, ridaforolimus, increased the thrashing behavior to the same level as nontransgenic nematodes. CONCLUSION: These data support a role for LRRK2 in autophagy, raise the possibility that deficits in autophagy contribute to the pathophysiology of LRRK2, and point to a potential therapeutic approach addressing the pathophysiology of LRRK2 in PD.
27220776	BACKGROUND: There is evidence for a relevant role of inflammation in the pathogenesis of Parkinson's disease (PD). Mutations in the LRRK2 gene represent the most frequent genetic cause for autosomal dominant PD. LRRK2 is highly expressed in macrophages and microglia suggesting an involvement in inflammatory pathways. The objectives are to test (1) whether idiopathic PD and LRRK2-associated PD share common inflammatory pathways or present distinct profiles and (2) whether non-manifesting LRRK2 mutation carriers present with similar aspects of inflammatory profiles as seen in PD-affected patients. METHODS: We assessed serum profiles of 23 immune-associated markers and the brain-derived neurotrophic factor in 534 individuals from the MJFF LRRK2 consortium. RESULTS: A large proportion of inflammatory markers were gender-dependent. Both PD-affected cohorts showed increased levels of the pro-inflammatory marker fatty-acid-binding protein. Additionally, idiopathic PD but not LRRK2-associated PD patients showed increased levels of the pro-inflammatory marker interleukin-12-p40 as well as the anti-inflammatory species interleukin-10, brain-derived neurotrophic factor, and stem cell factor. Non-manifesting LRRK2 mutation carriers including those with prodromal characteristics of PD presented with control-like inflammatory profiles. CONCLUSIONS: Concomitant inflammation seems to be associated with idiopathic and LRRK2-associated PD. Identifying PD patients in whom inflammatory processes play a major role in their pathophysiology might offer a new therapeutic window at least for a subgroup of patients. Since non-manifesting LRRK2 mutation carriers with symptoms of the prodromal phase of PD did not show inflammatory profiles, activation of the immune system seems not an early event in the disease cascade.
22302802	Missense mutations in leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) cause late-onset Parkinson's disease (PD), and common genetic variation in LRRK2 modifies susceptibility to Crohn's disease and leprosy. High levels of LRRK2 expression in peripheral monocytes and macrophages suggest a role for LRRK2 in these cells, yet little is known about LRRK2 expression and function in immune cells of the brain. Here, we demonstrate a role for LRRK2 in mediating microglial proinflammatory responses and morphology. In a murine model of neuroinflammation, we observe robust induction of LRRK2 in microglia. Experiments with toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4)-stimulated rat primary microglia show that inflammation increases LRRK2 activity and expression, while inhibition of LRRK2 kinase activity or knockdown of protein attenuates TNFalpha secretion and nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) induction. LRRK2 inhibition blocks TLR4 stimulated microglial process outgrowth and impairs ADP stimulated microglial chemotaxis. However, actin inhibitors that phenocopy inhibition of process outgrowth and chemotaxis fail to modify TLR4 stimulation of TNFalpha secretion and inducible iNOS induction, suggesting that LRRK2 acts upstream of cytoskeleton control as a stress-responsive kinase. These data demonstrate LRRK2 in regulating responses in immune cells of the brain and further implicate microglial involvement in late-onset PD.
21983832	Leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) has been identified by genome-wide association studies as being encoded by a major susceptibility gene for Crohn's disease. Here we found that LRRK2 deficiency conferred enhanced susceptibility to experimental colitis in mice. Mechanistic studies showed that LRRK2 was a potent negative regulator of the transcription factor NFAT and was a component of a complex that included the large noncoding RNA NRON (an NFAT repressor). Furthermore, the risk-associated allele encoding LRRK2 Met2397 identified by a genome-wide association study for Crohn's disease resulted in less LRRK2 protein post-translationally. Severe colitis in LRRK2-deficient mice was associated with enhanced nuclear localization of NFAT1. Thus, our study defines a new step in the control of NFAT activation that involves an immunoregulatory function of LRRK2 and has important implications for inflammatory bowel disease.
22390486	Inflammatory bowel disease encompasses two chronic, complex relapsing diseases believed to be caused by an excessive and poorly controlled immune response to the intestinal microbiota. The advent of genome-wide association scans has allowed for rapid identification of multiple susceptibility genes for Crohn's disease and ulcerative colitis. A locus containing LRRK2 and MUC19 is a confirmed Crohn's disease susceptibility locus. This genetic association precipitates an important functional study in which Liu et al. demonstrate that: LRRK2 acts as a negative regulator of NFAT in an NRON-dependent manner; LRRK2-deficient mice exhibit increased susceptibility to the development of dextran sodium sulfate colitis, which is enhanced by NFAT translocation to the nucleus; and patients exhibiting the risk LRRK2 allele have lower LRRK2 protein levels and exhibit less inhibition of NFAT. These data support the concept that defects within innate immunity trigger a robust adaptive immune response, which results in the production of proinflammatory cytokines and the development of chronic inflammation of the gastrointestinal mucosa.
27621483	Protein kinases catalyse the addition of phosphate groups to Ser/Thr and Tyr residues in cognate substrates and are mutated or hyperactive in a variety of diseases, making them important targets for rationally designed drugs. A good example is the Parkinson's disease-associated kinase, leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2), which is mutated (and probably hyperactive) in a small, but significant, subset of patients. An exciting new approach for personalised therapy is the development of central nervous system (CNS)-active small-molecule kinase inhibitors, which could be employed to 'normalise' LRRK2 signalling in affected cell types. However, the development of such drugs requires validated assays for the analysis of target engagement and the assembly of a set of tools for interrogating LRRK2, and its substrates, both in vitro and in vivo A new study published in the Biochemical Journal by Ito et al. establishes that a 'Phos-tag'-binding assay can be exploited to measure phosphorylation of a recently identified LRRK2 substrate (Ras-related protein in brain 10 (Rab10)), and to compare and contrast relative catalytic output from disease-associated LRRK2 mutants. Powerful in vivo chemical genetic approaches are also disclosed, in which the catalytic activity of LRRK2 is unequivocally linked to the extent of Rab10 phosphorylation and the effects of chemically distinct LRRK2 inhibitors are matched with on-target inhibition mechanisms mediated through LRRK2 and its substrate Rab10. These important findings should simplify the generic analysis of Rab10 phosphorylation in model biological systems and are likely to be applicable to other substrates of LRRK2 (or indeed other kinases) for which phospho-specific antibodies are either absent or unsatisfactory.
27432119	Parkinson's disease gene leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) has been implicated in a number of processes including the regulation of mitochondrial function, autophagy and endocytic dynamics; nevertheless, we know little about its potential role in the regulation of synaptic plasticity. Here we demonstrate that postsynaptic knockdown of the fly homologue of LRRK2 thwarts retrograde, homeostatic synaptic compensation at the larval neuromuscular junction. Conversely, postsynaptic overexpression of either the fly or human LRRK2 transgene induces a retrograde enhancement of presynaptic neurotransmitter release by increasing the size of the release ready pool of vesicles. We show that LRRK2 promotes cap-dependent translation and identify Furin 1 as its translational target, which is required for the synaptic function of LRRK2. As the regulation of synaptic homeostasis plays a fundamental role in ensuring normal and stable synaptic function, our findings suggest that aberrant function of LRRK2 may lead to destabilization of neural circuits.
25904107	Mutations in the leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) gene are the most common known genetic cause of Parkinson's disease, and LRRK2 is also linked to Crohn's and Hansen's disease. LRRK2 is expressed in many organs in mammals but is particularly abundant in the kidney. We find that LRRK2 protein is predominantly localized to collecting duct cells in the rat kidney, with much lower expression in other kidney cells. While genetic knockout (KO) of LRRK2 expression is well-tolerated in mice and rats, a unique age-dependent pathology develops in the kidney. The cortex and medulla of LRRK2 KO rat kidneys become darkly pigmented in early adulthood, yet aged animals display no overt signs of kidney failure. Accompanying the dark pigment we find substantial macrophage infiltration in LRRK2 KO kidneys, suggesting the presence of chronic inflammation that may predispose to kidney disease. Unexpectedly, the dark kidneys of the LRRK2 KO rats are highly resistant to rhabdomyolysis-induced acute kidney injury compared with wild-type rats. Biochemical profiling of the LRRK2 KO kidneys using immunohistochemistry, proteomic and lipidomic analyses show a massive accumulation of hemoglobin and lipofuscin in renal tubules that account for the pigmentation. The proximal tubules demonstrate a corresponding up-regulation of the cytoprotective protein heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1) which is capable of mitigating acute kidney injury. The unusual kidney pathology of LRRK2 KO rats highlights several novel physiological roles for LRRK2 and provides indirect evidence for HO-1 expression as a protective mechanism in acute kidney injury in LRRK2 deficiency.
25317655	Mutations in leucine-rich-repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) are the most frequent cause of late-onset Parkinson's disease (PD). LRRK2 belongs to the Roco family of proteins which share a conserved Ras-like G-domain (Roc) and a C-terminal of Roc (COR) domain tandem. The nucleotide state of small G-proteins is strictly controlled by guanine-nucleotide-exchange factors (GEFs) and GTPase-activating proteins (GAPs). Because of contradictory structural and biochemical data, the regulatory mechanism of the LRRK2 Roc G-domain and the RocCOR tandem is still under debate. In the present study, we solved the first nucleotide-bound Roc structure and used LRRK2 and bacterial Roco proteins to characterize the RocCOR function in more detail. Nucleotide binding induces a drastic structural change in the Roc/COR domain interface, a region strongly implicated in patients with an LRRK2 mutation. Our data confirm previous assumptions that the C-terminal subdomain of COR functions as a dimerization device. We show that the dimer formation is independent of nucleotide. The affinity for GDP/GTP is in the micromolar range, the result of which is high dissociation rates in the s-1 range. Thus Roco proteins are unlikely to need GEFs to achieve activation. Monomeric LRRK2 and Roco G-domains have a similar low GTPase activity to small G-proteins. We show that GTPase activity in bacterial Roco is stimulated by the nucleotide-dependent dimerization of the G-domain within the complex. We thus propose that the Roco proteins do not require GAPs to stimulate GTP hydrolysis but stimulate each other by one monomer completing the catalytic machinery of the other.
20205471	Various mutations in leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) have been linked to susceptibility for both familial and idiopathic late-onset Parkinson's disease (PD). In this study, we have demonstrated that phosphorylation of MBP and LRRKtide by the LRRK2 G2019S mutant was activated by Mn(2+) in vitro. This enhanced G2019S kinase activity was due to the combination of an increase in kinase and a decrease in ATPase activity by Mn(2+). Compared to 10 mM Mg(2+), 1 mM Mn(2+) reduced ATP K(m) for G2019S from 103 to 1.8 muM and only modestly reduced k(cat) (2.5-fold); as a result, the Mn(2+) increased its k(cat)/K(m) by 22-fold. This change in ATP K(m) was due in large part to an increase in nucleotide affinity. While Mn(2+) also increased ATP affinity and had similar effects on k(cat)/K(m) for LRRK2 WT and R1441C enzymes, it reduced their k(cat) values significantly by 13-17-fold. Consequently, the difference in the kinase activity between G2019S and other LRRK2 variants was enhanced from about 2-fold in Mg(2+) to 10-fold in Mn(2+) at saturating ATP concentrations relative to its K(m). Furthermore, while Mg(2+) yielded optimal V(max) values at Mg(2+) concentration greater than 5 mM, the optimal Mn(2+) concentration for activating LRRK2 catalysis was in the micromolar range with increasing Mn(2+) above 1 mM causing a decrease in enzyme activity. Finally, despite the large but expected differences in IC(50) tested at 100 muM ATP, the apparent K(i) values of a small set of LRRK2 ATP-competitive inhibitors were within 5-fold between Mg(2+)- and Mn(2+)-mediated reactions except AMP-CPP, an ATP analogue.
18936941	Certain genetic defects in LRRK2 and parkin are pathogenic for Parkinson's disease (PD) and both proteins deposit in the characteristic Lewy bodies. LRRK2 is thought to be involved in the early initiation of Lewy bodies. The involvement of LRRK2 and parkin in the similar cellular deposition of fibrillar alpha-synuclein in glial cytoplasmic inclusions (GCI) in multiple system atrophy (MSA) has not yet been assessed. To determine whether LRRK2 and parkin may be similarly associated with the abnormal deposition of alpha-synuclein in MSA GCI, paraffin-embedded sections from the basal ganglia of 12 patients with MSA, 4 with PD and 4 controls were immunostained for LRRK2, parkin, alpha-synuclein and oligodendroglial proteins using triple labelling procedures. The severity of neuronal loss was graded and the proportion of abnormally enlarged oligodendroglia containing different combinations of proteins assessed in 80-100 cells per case. Parkin immunoreactivity was observed in only a small proportion of GCI. In contrast, LRRK2 was found in most of the enlarged oligodendroglia in MSA and colocalised with the majority of alpha-synuclein-immunopositive GCI. Degrading myelin sheaths containing LRRK2-immunoreactivity were also observed, showing an association with one of the earliest oligodendroglial abnormalities observed in MSA. The proportion of LRRK2-immunopositive GCI was negatively associated with an increase in neuronal loss and alpha-synuclein-immunopositive dystrophic axons. Our results indicate that an increase in LRRK2 expression occurs early in association with myelin degradation and GCI formation, and that a reduction in LRRK2 expression in oligodendroglia is associated with increased neuronal loss in MSA.
17971075	Classical Parkinson's disease (PD) is characterized by the appearance of Lewy bodies (LBs) in affected brain regions, showing mostly compact alpha-synuclein deposition, in contrast with punctate or granular deposition, hypothesized to represent early stages of aggregation. Leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) is the commonest mutated gene in inherited and idiopathic PD. LRRK2 mutation carriers display a diverse neuropathology, including alpha-synuclein and tau inclusions, suggesting an upstream role for LRRK2 in protein aggregation. We studied LRRK2 expression throughout the normal human brain with three different antibodies. We also examined the pattern of LRRK2 expression in relation to alpha-synuclein aggregation and LB formation in the brainstem of sporadic LB disease. Physiological LRRK2 expression was not restricted to regions preferentially affected in PD and LRRK2 often localized to the nuclear envelope in addition to the known cytoplasmic expression. In PD, we were able to consistently detect LRRK2 in the halo of a minority (approximately 10%) of nigral LBs using three different antibodies. Only one antibody detected LRRK2 in the core of approximately 80% of classic LBs. In the lower brainstem, most notably in the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus, we found previously unrecognized LRRK2 labelling of complex globular lesions, filled with LB-like matter showing a punctate or granular staining for alpha-synuclein. This was often accompanied by strong LRRK2 expression within dystrophic neurites. Our findings confirm widespread physiological LRRK2 expression in the human brain and suggest an association of LRRK2 with possible early-stage alpha-synuclein pathology in the brainstem of PD.
17060589	Lrrk2 G2019S is predominantly associated with alpha-synuclein-immunopositive Lewy body pathology. We have identified Family SK where Lrrk2 G2019S segregates with slowly progressive parkinsonism and the affected proband has tau-immunopositive neurofibrillary tangle pathology. Thus alpha-synucleinopathy and tauopathy, the predominant pathologies associated with parkinsonism, may be alternate outcomes of the same underlying genetic cause. Intriguingly, we observe no evidence of a direct interaction between either the tau or alpha-synuclein protein with Lrrk2.
18703517	GbpC is a large multidomain protein involved in cGMP-mediated chemotaxis in the cellular slime mold Dictyostelium discoideum. GbpC belongs to the Roco family of proteins that often share a central core region, consisting of leucine-rich repeats, a Ras domain (Roc), a Cor domain, and a MAPKKKinase domain. In addition to this core, GbpC contains a RasGEF domain and two cGMP-binding domains. Here, we report on an intramolecular signaling cascade of GbpC. In vitro, the RasGEF domain of GbpC specifically accelerates the GDP/GTP exchange of the Roc domain. Moreover, cGMP binding to GbpC strongly stimulates the binding of GbpC to GTP-agarose, suggesting cGMP-stimulated GDP/GTP exchange at the Roc domain. The function of the protein in vivo was investigated by rescue analysis of the chemotactic defect of gbpC null cells. Mutants that lack a functional guanine exchange factor (GEF), Roc, or kinase domain are inactive in vivo. Together, the results suggest a four-step intramolecular activation mechanism of the Roco protein GbpC: cGMP binding to the cyclic nucleotide-binding domains, activation of the GEF domain, GDP/GTP exchange of Roc, and activation of the MAPKKK domain.
24794857	Mutations in LRRK2 are one of the primary genetic causes of Parkinson's disease (PD). LRRK2 contains a kinase and a GTPase domain, and familial PD mutations affect both enzymatic activities. However, the signaling mechanisms regulating LRRK2 and the pathogenic effects of familial mutations remain unknown. Identifying the signaling proteins that regulate LRRK2 function and toxicity remains a critical goal for the development of effective therapeutic strategies. In this study, we apply systems biology tools to human PD brain and blood transcriptomes to reverse-engineer a LRRK2-centered gene regulatory network. This network identifies several putative master regulators of LRRK2 function. In particular, the signaling gene RGS2, which encodes for a GTPase-activating protein (GAP), is a key regulatory hub connecting the familial PD-associated genes DJ-1 and PINK1 with LRRK2 in the network. RGS2 expression levels are reduced in the striata of LRRK2 and sporadic PD patients. We identify RGS2 as a novel interacting partner of LRRK2 in vivo. RGS2 regulates both the GTPase and kinase activities of LRRK2. We show in mammalian neurons that RGS2 regulates LRRK2 function in the control of neuronal process length. RGS2 is also protective against neuronal toxicity of the most prevalent mutation in LRRK2, G2019S. We find that RGS2 regulates LRRK2 function and neuronal toxicity through its effects on kinase activity and independently of GTPase activity, which reveals a novel mode of action for GAP proteins. This work identifies RGS2 as a promising target for interfering with neurodegeneration due to LRRK2 mutations in PD patients.
27798112	Parkinson's disease (PD) is characterized by slow, progressive degeneration of dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra. The cause of neuronal death in PD is largely unknown, but several genetic loci, including leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2), have been identified. LRRK2 has guanosine triphosphatase (GTPase) and kinase activities, and mutations in LRRK2 are the major cause of autosomal-dominant familial PD. Histone deacetylases (HDACs) remove acetyl groups from lysine residues on histone tails, promoting transcriptional repression via condensation of chromatin. Here, we demonstrate that LRRK2 binds to and directly phosphorylates HDAC3 at Ser-424, thereby stimulating HDAC activity. Specifically, LRRK2 promoted the deacetylation of Lys-5 and Lys-12 on histone H4, causing repression of gene transcription. Moreover, LRRK2 stimulated nuclear translocation of HDAC3 via the phoshorylation of karyopherin subunit alpha2 and alpha6. HDAC3 phosphorylation and its nuclear translocation were increased in response to 6-hydroxydopamine (6-OHDA) treatment. LRRK2 also inhibited myocyte-specific enhancer factor 2D activity, which is required for neuronal survival. LRRK2 ultimately promoted 6-OHDA-induced cell death via positive modulation of HDAC3. These findings suggest that LRRK2 affects epigenetic histone modification and neuronal survival by facilitating HDAC3 activity and regulating its localization.
20624856	Missense mutations in leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2)/Dardarin gene, the product of which encodes a kinase with multiple domains, are known to cause autosomal dominant late onset Parkinson's disease (PD). In the current study, we report that the gene product LRRK2 directly phosphorylates the forkhead box transcription factor FoxO1 and enhances its transcriptional activity. This pathway was found to be conserved in Drosophila, as the Drosophila LRRK2 homolog (dLRRK) enhanced the neuronal toxicity of FoxO. Importantly, FoxO mutants that were resistant to LRRK2/dLRRK-induced phosphorylation suppressed this neurotoxicity. Moreover, we have determined that FoxO targets hid and bim in Drosophila and human, respectively, are responsible for the LRRK2/dLRRK-mediated cell death. These data suggest that the cell death molecules regulated by FoxO are key factors during the neurodegeneration in LRRK2-linked PD.
23220480	Leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) is the molecule responsible for autosomal-dominant Parkinson's disease (PD), PARK8, but the etiologic effects of its mutation remain unknown. In the present study, we investigated a novel mechanism for the neurodegeneration induced by I2020T mutant LRRK2. Using native gel electrophoresis and immunoprecipitation, we found that wild-type (WT) LRRK2 formed a heterodimer with I2020T LRRK2 in transfected cells, and that the heterodimer exhibited a markedly lower intracellular protein level than the WT/WT-homodimer. An increased amount of I2020T LRRK2 decreased the protein level of co-transfected WT LRRK2. A pulse-chase experiment revealed that the intracellular protein lifetime of WT LRRK2 was shortened by co-transfection with I2020T LRRK2. These results suggest that I2020T LRRK2 enhances the intracellular degradation of WT LRRK2 through WT/I2020T-heterodimer formation. Overexpression of WT LRRK2 in HEK293 cells increased the phosphorylation level of Akt1 (S473), a possible physiological substrate of LRRK2, and made cells resistant to hydrogen peroxide-induced apoptosis. However, both Akt1 phosphorylation and apoptosis resistance were reduced in WT/I2020T-expressing cells in comparison with WT/WT-expressing cells. Reduction of Akt1 phosphorylation and apoptosis resistance were also evident when a neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y clone overexpressing WT LRRK2 was transfected with the I2020T LRRK2. Altogether, these results suggest that the I2020T mutation enhances the intracellular degradation of LRRK2 through WT/I2020T-heterodimer formation, leading to reduced Akt1 phosphorylation and diminished protectivity against apoptosis. Our findings suggest the possibility of a dominant-negative mechanism of neurodegeneration in PD caused by I2020T LRRK2 mutation.
20434426	Mutations within the LRRK2 (leucine-rich repeat kinase 2) gene predispose humans to develop late-onset Parkinson's disease (PD). The most prevalent of these mutations, G2019S, has been shown to increase LRRK2 kinase activity. Therefore, the discovery of small molecule inhibitors of LRRK2(G2019S) through high-throughput screening (HTS) may provide a novel therapeutic strategy for treating PD. Current biochemical assays monitoring the activity of LRRK2(G2019S) either are radioactive or use short peptidic substrates. Here we describe the development and optimization of a novel HTS AlphaScreen assay for measuring the catalytic activity of full-length LRRK2(G2019S) using its putative physiological protein substrate moesin. The high sensitivity of this optimized 384-well assay allowed the use of enzyme concentrations as low as 0.75nM. The estimated apparent K(m) value for adenosine triphosphate (6 microM) using the glutathione S-transferase-moesin substrate was much lower than the one previously reported using LRRKtide, a synthetic peptide derived from moesin. Testing of nonselective kinase inhibitors (staurosporine, H-1152, and Y-27632) generated potencies consistent with published data. Finally, robotic validation of the assay yielded an average Z' factor of 0.80. Overall, these results indicate that the present HTS AlphaScreen assay might provide a more relevant biochemical approach for the discovery of novel LRRK2(G2019S) inhibitors.
22110348	Neurite outgrowth and its maintenance are essential aspects of neuronal cells for their connectivity and communication with other neurons. Recent studies showed that over-expression of either leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2), whose mutations are associated with familial Parkinson's disease (PD), or Rab5b, an early endosomal marker protein, induces reduction in neurite length. Based on our recent findings that LRRK2 co-localizes and interacts with Rab5, we tested the hypothesis that LRRK2 and Rab5 may functionally interplay while controlling neurite outgrowth. Firstly, we confirmed previous reports that over-expression of either the LRRK2 PD-specific G2019S mutant or the Rab5 constitutively active Q79L mutant, but not of dominant negative N133I mutant, significantly reduces neurite outgrowth. Secondly, when over-expression of either LRRK2 wild type (WT) or G2019S was accompanied with over-expression of one of the Rab5 variants (WT, Q79L and N133I), or with down-regulation of Rab5, the reduction extent of its neurite length was similar to that of cells over-expressing LRRK2 alone, regardless of Rab5's status. Finally, we observed similar patterns of neurite length regulation in embryonic rat hippocampal neuron cultures. Taken together, our results suggest that LRRK2 and Rab5 functionally coordinate their regulation of neurite outgrowth and that LRRK2 is a more critical factor than Rab5.
17385669	The 6055G>A mutation in the leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) gene results in a G2019S substitution in the mixed-lineage kinase domain of Lrrk2, causing autosomal dominant Parkinson's disease (PD). We hypothesized the mutation alters cellular mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signalling cascades, and might be detectable in tissues other than in the brain. We therefore compared total levels and activation of the signalling proteins Src, HSP27, p38 MAPK, JNK, and ERK, in extracts of leukocytes isolated from patients with PD carrying the G2019S mutation, healthy mutation carriers, patients with idiopathic PD, and healthy controls. Phosphorylation of Src, HSP27, and JNK was reduced significantly in cell extracts from patients with G2019S-associated PD compared to healthy controls. Similarly, phosphorylation was reduced significantly in Src and HSP27 in the group of healthy carriers of the mutation, as well as in patients with idiopathic PD. Significant reductions in total Src were also observed in these three groups compared to the controls. The results of this pilot project therefore indicate significant alterations in key signalling proteins in leukocytes from patients with PD, and were most pronounced in G2019S-associated PD. Changes in MAPK-signalling may thus be common to PD pathophysiology, regardless of aetiology. Such changes may also be shown in blood samples during the preclinical stage of LRRK2-associated PD, which could be particularly important for the development of neuroprotective strategies to delay onset, or slow progression of PD.
28282269	Synapses are very specialized compartments with high metabolic demand to maintain neurotransmission, an essential step for basic brain function. Neurons are post-mitotic and synapses need to stay functional over time-sometimes over decades. Given that synapses are often at a long distance from the cell body, they must use local mechanisms to regulate protein quality control. We show that macroautophagy/autophagy is one of these local processes and found that it is under strict control of the synapse-enriched protein EndoA/Endophilin-A, previously only implicated in endocytosis. Metabolic and neuronal stimulation induce synaptic autophagy and phosphorylation of EndoA by the Parkinson disease kinase Lrrk/LRRK2 is essential to promote the process. EndoA induces membrane curvature in vitro, and, mechanistically, phosphorylated EndoA creates curved membrane-protein docking sites that are capable of recruiting Atg3. Our work reveals a synapse-enriched branch of autophagy under the control of EndoA that may be deregulated in Parkinson disease.
26117366	Glucocerebrosidase (GBA) mutations have been associated with Parkinson's disease in numerous studies. However, it is unknown whether the increased risk of Parkinson's disease in GBA carriers is due to a loss of glucocerebrosidase enzymatic activity. We measured glucocerebrosidase enzymatic activity in dried blood spots in patients with Parkinson's disease (n = 517) and controls (n = 252) with and without GBA mutations. Participants were recruited from Columbia University, New York, and fully sequenced for GBA mutations and genotyped for the LRRK2 G2019S mutation, the most common autosomal dominant mutation in the Ashkenazi Jewish population. Glucocerebrosidase enzymatic activity in dried blood spots was measured by a mass spectrometry-based assay and compared among participants categorized by GBA mutation status and Parkinson's disease diagnosis. Parkinson's disease patients were more likely than controls to carry the LRRK2 G2019S mutation (n = 39, 7.5% versus n = 2, 0.8%, P < 0.001) and GBA mutations or variants (seven homozygotes and compound heterozygotes and 81 heterozygotes, 17.0% versus 17 heterozygotes, 6.7%, P < 0.001). GBA homozygotes/compound heterozygotes had lower enzymatic activity than GBA heterozygotes (0.85 micromol/l/h versus 7.88 micromol/l/h, P < 0.001), and GBA heterozygotes had lower enzymatic activity than GBA and LRRK2 non-carriers (7.88 micromol/l/h versus 11.93 micromol/l/h, P < 0.001). Glucocerebrosidase activity was reduced in heterozygotes compared to non-carriers when each mutation was compared independently (N370S, P < 0.001; L444P, P < 0.001; 84GG, P = 0.003; R496H, P = 0.018) and also reduced in GBA variants associated with Parkinson's risk but not with Gaucher disease (E326K, P = 0.009; T369M, P < 0.001). When all patients with Parkinson's disease were considered, they had lower mean glucocerebrosidase enzymatic activity than controls (11.14 micromol/l/h versus 11.85 micromol/l/h, P = 0.011). Difference compared to controls persisted in patients with idiopathic Parkinson's disease (after exclusion of all GBA and LRRK2 carriers; 11.53 micromol/l/h, versus 12.11 micromol/l/h, P = 0.036) and after adjustment for age and gender (P = 0.012). Interestingly, LRRK2 G2019S carriers (n = 36), most of whom had Parkinson's disease, had higher enzymatic activity than non-carriers (13.69 micromol/l/h versus 11.93 micromol/l/h, P = 0.002). In patients with idiopathic Parkinson's, higher glucocerebrosidase enzymatic activity was associated with longer disease duration (P = 0.002) in adjusted models, suggesting a milder disease course. We conclude that lower glucocerebrosidase enzymatic activity is strongly associated with GBA mutations, and modestly with idiopathic Parkinson's disease. The association of lower glucocerebrosidase activity in both GBA mutation carriers and Parkinson's patients without GBA mutations suggests that loss of glucocerebrosidase function contributes to the pathogenesis of Parkinson's disease. High glucocerebrosidase enzymatic activity in LRRK2 G2019S carriers may reflect a distinct pathogenic mechanism. Taken together, these data suggest that glucocerebrosidase enzymatic activity could be a modifiable therapeutic target.
27273569	A common genetic form of Parkinson's disease (PD) is caused by mutations in LRRK2. We identify WSB1 as a LRRK2 interacting protein. WSB1 ubiquitinates LRRK2 through K27 and K29 linkage chains, leading to LRRK2 aggregation and neuronal protection in primary neurons and a Drosophila model of G2019S LRRK2. Knocking down endogenous WSB1 exacerbates mutant LRRK2 neuronal toxicity in neurons and the Drosophila model, indicating a role for endogenous WSB1 in modulating LRRK2 cell toxicity. WSB1 is in Lewy bodies in human PD post-mortem tissue. These data demonstrate a role for WSB1 in mutant LRRK2 pathogenesis, and suggest involvement in Lewy body pathology in sporadic PD. Our data indicate a role in PD for ubiquitin K27 and K29 linkages, and suggest that ubiquitination may be a signal for aggregation and neuronal protection in PD, which may be relevant for other neurodegenerative disorders. Finally, our study identifies a novel therapeutic target for PD.
21686713	The G2019S leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 gene (LRRK2) mutation has been identified in a significant proportion of familial and sporadic cases of Parkinson's disease (PD). Until now, information on the neuropathological changes associated with the G2019S LRRK2 mutation has been sparse. We report a 77-year-old patient who presented with a 14 year history of PD but, unexpectedly, histopathological examination disclosed mild neuronal loss in the substantia nigra without alpha-synuclein, tau or ubiquitin cytoplasmic inclusions. A G2019S LRRK2 mutation was eventually detected. The present case confirms that clinical PD caused by G2019S mutations can be associated with non-specific nigral degeneration without Lewy.
25483009	LRRK2 mutations are a frequent cause of familial Parkinson disease (PD) and are also found in a number of sporadic PD cases. PD-linked G2019S and I2020T mutations in the kinase domain of LRRK2 result in elevated kinase activity, which is required for the toxicity of these pathogenic variants in cell and animal models of PD. We recently reported that LRRK2 interacts with and phosphorylates a number of mammalian ribosomal proteins, several of which exhibit increased phosphorylation via both G2019S and I2020T LRRK2. Blocking the phosphorylation of ribosomal protein s15 through expression of phospho-deficient T136A s15 prevents age-associated locomotor deficits and dopamine neuron loss caused by G2019S LRRK2 expression in Drosophila indicating that s15 is a pathogenic LRRK2 substrate. We previously described that G2019S LRRK2 causes an induction of bulk mRNA translation that is blocked by T136A s15 or the protein synthesis inhibitor anisomycin. Here, we report the protective effects of the eIF4E/eIF4G interaction inhibitor 4EGI-1, in preventing neurodegenerative phenotypes in G2019S LRRK2 flies, and discuss how our findings and those of other groups provide a framework to begin investigating the mechanistic impact of LRRK2 on translation.
20127702	Parkinson's disease (PD) is generally sporadic but a number of genetic diseases have parkinsonism as a clinical feature. Two dominant genes, alpha-synuclein (SNCA) and leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2), are important for understanding inherited and sporadic PD. SNCA is a major component of pathologic inclusions termed Lewy bodies found in PD. LRRK2 is found in a significant proportion of PD cases. These two proteins may be linked as most LRRK2 PD cases have SNCA-positive Lewy bodies. Mutations in both proteins are associated with toxic effects in model systems although mechanisms are unclear. LRRK2 is an intracellular signaling protein possessing both GTPase and kinase activities that may contribute to pathogenicity. A third protein, tau, is implicated as a risk factor for PD. We discuss the potential relationship between these genes and suggest a model for PD pathogenesis where LRRK2 is upstream of pathogenic effects through SNCA, tau, or both proteins.
23628791	The extra-pyramidal symptoms associated with manganism often overlap with that seen in Parkinsonism suggesting a common link between the two disorders. Since wide deviations are observed in susceptibility and characteristics of the symptoms observed in manganism, these differences may be due to underlying genetic variability. Genes linked to early onset of Parkinsonism which includes ATP13A2 and parkin have already been suggested to promote development of Mn toxicity. Of the other Parkinson-linked genes, mutations in LRRK2, an autosomal dominant gene, represent another likely candidate involved in the development of manganism. In this paper the effect of shRNA LRRK2 knock-down on Mn toxicity was examined in control and DAT transfected HEK293 cells. Results demonstrate that LRRK2 down-regulation potentiates Mn toxicity in both control and DAT-transfected cell as well as potentiates DA toxicity. Combined treatment of Mn and DA further augments cell toxicity, ROS production and JNK phosphorylation in LRRK2 deficient cells compared to controls. Consistent with studies demonstrating that LRRK2 plays a role in the phosphorylation of p38, our results similarly demonstrate a decrease in p38 activation in LRRK2 knock-down cells. Our findings suggest that null mutations in LRRK2 which cause Parkinsonism potentiate Mn toxicity and increase susceptibility to develop manganism.
25316291	Leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) mutations are the most common genetic cause of Parkinson's disease. LRRK2 is a multifunctional protein affecting many cellular processes and has been described to bind microtubules. Defective microtubule-based axonal transport is hypothesized to contribute to Parkinson's disease, but whether LRRK2 mutations affect this process to mediate pathogenesis is not known. Here we find that LRRK2 containing pathogenic Roc-COR domain mutations (R1441C, Y1699C) preferentially associates with deacetylated microtubules, and inhibits axonal transport in primary neurons and in Drosophila, causing locomotor deficits in vivo. In vitro, increasing microtubule acetylation using deacetylase inhibitors or the tubulin acetylase alphaTAT1 prevents association of mutant LRRK2 with microtubules, and the deacetylase inhibitor trichostatin A (TSA) restores axonal transport. In vivo knockdown of the deacetylases HDAC6 and Sirt2, or administration of TSA rescues both axonal transport and locomotor behavior. Thus, this study reveals a pathogenic mechanism and a potential intervention for Parkinson's disease.
28930069	LRRK2 mutations produce end-stage Parkinson's disease (PD) with reduced nigrostriatal dopamine, whereas, asymptomatic carriers have increased dopamine turnover and altered brain connectivity. LRRK2 pathophysiology remains unclear, but reduced dopamine and mitochondrial abnormalities occur in aged G2019S mutant knock-in (GKI) mice. Conversely, cultured GKI neurons exhibit increased synaptic transmission. We assessed behavior and synaptic glutamate and dopamine function across a range of ages. Young GKI mice exhibit more vertical exploration, elevated glutamate and dopamine transmission, and aberrant D2-receptor responses. These phenomena decline with age, but are stable in littermates. In young GKI mice, dopamine transients are slower, independent of dopamine transporter (DAT), increasing the lifetime of extracellular dopamine. Slowing of dopamine transients is observed with age in littermates, suggesting premature ageing of dopamine synapses in GKI mice. Thus, GKI mice exhibit early, but declining, synaptic and behavioral phenotypes, making them amenable to investigation of early pathophysiological, and later parkinsonian-like, alterations. This model will prove valuable in efforts to develop neuroprotection for PD.
25471590	Several proteins encoded by PD genes are implicated in synaptic vesicle traffic. Endophilin, a key factor in the endocytosis of synaptic vesicles, was shown to bind to, and be ubiquitinated by, the PD-linked E3 ubiquitin ligase Parkin. Here we report that Parkin's level is specifically upregulated in brain and fibroblasts of endophilin mutant mice due to increased transcriptional regulation. Studies of transfected HEK293T cells show that Parkin ubiquitinates not only endophilin, but also its major binding partners, dynamin and synaptojanin 1. These results converge with the recently reported functional relationship of endophilin to the PD gene LRRK2 and with the identification of a PD-linked synaptojanin 1 mutation, in providing evidence for a link between PD and endocytosis genes.
17346966	Neurons are polarized cells that contain distinct sets of proteins in their axons and dendrites. Synaptic vesicles (SV) and many SV proteins are exclusively localized in the presynaptic regions but not in dendrites. Despite their fundamental importance, the mechanisms underlying the polarized localization of SV proteins remain unclear. The transparent nematode Caenorhabditis elegans can be used to examine sorting and transport of SV proteins in vivo. Here, we identify a novel protein kinase LRK-1, a C. elegans homolog of the familial Parkinsonism gene PARK8/LRRK2 that is required for polarized localization of SV proteins. In lrk-1 deletion mutants, SV proteins are localized to both presynaptic and dendritic endings in neurons. This aberrant localization of SV proteins in the dendrites is dependent on the AP-1 mu1 clathrin adaptor UNC-101, which is involved in polarized dendritic transport, but not on UNC-104 kinesin, which is required for the transport of SV to presynaptic regions. The LRK-1 proteins are localized in the Golgi apparatus. These results suggest that the LRK-1 protein kinase determines polarized sorting of SV proteins to the axons by excluding SV proteins from the dendrite-specific transport machinery in the Golgi.
19251702	Mutations in two genes encoding the putative kinases LRRK2 and PINK1 have been associated with inherited variants of Parkinson disease. The physiological role of both proteins is not known at present, but studies in model organisms have linked their mutants to distinct aspects of mitochondrial dysfunction, increased vulnerability to oxidative and endoplasmic reticulum stress, and intracellular protein sorting. Here, we show that a mutation in the Caenorhabditits elegans homologue of the PTEN-induced kinase pink-1 gene resulted in reduced mitochondrial cristae length and increased paraquat sensitivity of the nematode. Moreover, the mutants also displayed defects in axonal outgrowth of a pair of canal-associated neurons. We demonstrate that in the absence of lrk-1, the C. elegans homologue of human LRRK2, all phenotypic aspects of pink-1 loss-of-function mutants were suppressed. Conversely, the hypersensitivity of lrk-1 mutant animals to the endoplasmic reticulum stressor tunicamycin was reduced in a pink-1 mutant background. These results provide the first evidence of an antagonistic role of PINK-1 and LRK-1. Due to the similarity of the C. elegans proteins to human LRRK2 and PINK1, we suggest a common role of both factors in cellular functions including stress response and regulation of neurite outgrowth. This study might help to link pink-1/PINK1 and lrk-1/LRRK2 function to the pathological processes resulting from Parkinson disease-related mutants in both genes, the first manifestations of which are cytoskeletal defects in affected neurons.
28649611	Mutations associated with leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 are the most common known cause of Parkinson's disease. The known expression of leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 in immune cells and its negative regulatory function of nuclear factor of activated T cells implicates leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 in the development of the inflammatory environment characteristic of Parkinson's disease. The aim of this study was to determine the expression pattern of leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 in immune cell subsets and correlate it with the immunophenotype of cells from Parkinson's disease and healthy subjects. For immunophenotyping, blood cells from 40 Parkinson's disease patients and 32 age and environment matched-healthy control subjects were analyzed by flow cytometry. Multiplexed immunoassays were used to measure cytokine output of stimulated cells. Leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 expression was increased in B cells (p = 0.0095), T cells (p = 0.029), and CD16+ monocytes (p = 0.01) of Parkinson's disease patients compared to healthy controls. Leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 induction was also increased in monocytes and dividing T cells in Parkinson's disease patients compared to healthy controls. In addition, Parkinson's disease patient monocytes secreted more inflammatory cytokines compared to healthy control, and cytokine expression positively correlated with leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 expression in T cells from Parkinson's disease but not healthy controls. Finally, the regulatory surface protein that limits T-cell activation signals, CTLA-4 (cytotoxic T-lymphocyte-associated protein 4), was decreased in Parkinson's disease compared to HC in T cells (p = 0.029). In sum, these findings suggest that leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 has a regulatory role in immune cells and Parkinson's disease. Functionally, the positive correlations between leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 expression levels in T-cell subsets, cytokine expression and secretion, and T-cell activation states suggest that targeting leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 with therapeutic interventions could have direct effects on immune cell function.
28158196	Mitochondrial dysfunction contributes to myriad monogenic and complex pathologies. To understand the underlying mechanisms, it is essential to define the full complement of proteins that modulate mitochondrial function. To identify such proteins, we performed a meta-analysis of publicly available gene expression data. Gene co-expression analysis of a large and heterogeneous compendium of microarray data nominated a sub-population of transcripts that whilst highly correlated with known mitochondrial protein-encoding transcripts (MPETs), are not themselves recognized as generating proteins either localized to the mitochondrion or pertinent to functions therein. To focus the analysis on a medically-important condition with a strong yet incompletely understood mitochondrial component, candidates were cross-referenced with an MPET-enriched module independently generated via genome-wide co-expression network analysis of a human heart failure gene expression dataset. The strongest uncharacterized candidate in the analysis was Leucine Rich Repeat Containing 2 (LRRC2). LRRC2 was found to be localized to the mitochondria in human cells and transcriptionally-regulated by the mitochondrial master regulator Pgc-1alpha. We report that Lrrc2 transcript abundance correlates with that of beta-MHC, a canonical marker of cardiac hypertrophy in humans and experimentally demonstrated an elevation in Lrrc2 transcript in in vitro and in vivo rodent models of cardiac hypertrophy as well as in patients with dilated cardiomyopathy. RNAi-mediated Lrrc2 knockdown in a rat-derived cardiomyocyte cell line resulted in enhanced expression of canonical hypertrophic biomarkers as well as increased mitochondrial mass in the context of increased Pgc-1alpha expression. In conclusion, our meta-analysis represents a simple yet powerful springboard for the nomination of putative mitochondrially-pertinent proteins relevant to cardiac function and enabled the identification of LRRC2 as a novel mitochondrially-relevant protein and regulator of the hypertrophic response.
28028237	Mutations in leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) and alpha-synuclein lead to Parkinson's disease (PD). Disruption of protein homeostasis is an emerging theme in PD pathogenesis, making mechanisms to reduce the accumulation of misfolded proteins an attractive therapeutic strategy. We determined if activating nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor (Nrf2), a potential therapeutic target for neurodegeneration, could reduce PD-associated neuron toxicity by modulating the protein homeostasis network. Using a longitudinal imaging platform, we visualized the metabolism and location of mutant LRRK2 and alpha-synuclein in living neurons at the single-cell level. Nrf2 reduced PD-associated protein toxicity by a cell-autonomous mechanism that was time-dependent. Furthermore, Nrf2 activated distinct mechanisms to handle different misfolded proteins. Nrf2 decreased steady-state levels of alpha-synuclein in part by increasing alpha-synuclein degradation. In contrast, Nrf2 sequestered misfolded diffuse LRRK2 into more insoluble and homogeneous inclusion bodies. By identifying the stress response strategies activated by Nrf2, we also highlight endogenous coping responses that might be therapeutically bolstered to treat PD.
22649237	Parkinson's disease (PD) is characterized pathologically by the formation of ubiquitin and alpha-synuclein (alpha-syn)-containing inclusions (Lewy bodies), dystrophic dopamine (DA) terminals, and degeneration of midbrain DA neurons. The precise molecular mechanisms underlying these pathological features remain elusive. Accumulating evidence has implicated dysfunctional autophagy, the cell self-digestion and neuroprotective pathway, as one of the pathogenic systems contributing to the development of idiopathic PD. Here we characterize autophagy-deficient mouse models and provide in vivo evidence for the potential role that impaired autophagy plays in pathogenesis associated with PD. Cell-specific deletion of essential autophagy gene Atg7 in midbrain DA neurons causes delayed neurodegeneration, accompanied by late-onset locomotor deficits. In contrast, Atg7-deficient DA neurons in the midbrain exhibit early dendritic and axonal dystrophy, reduced striatal dopamine content, and the formation of somatic and dendritic ubiquitinated inclusions in DA neurons. Furthermore, whole-brain-specific loss of Atg7 leads to presynaptic accumulation of alpha-syn and LRRK2 proteins, which are encoded by two autosomal dominantly inherited PD-related genes. Our results suggest that disrupted autophagy may be associated with enhanced levels of endogenous alpha-syn and LRRK2 proteins in vivo. Our findings implicate dysfunctional autophagy as one of the failing cellular mechanisms involved in the pathogenesis of idiopathic PD.
24407237	Genetic and idiopathic forms of Parkinson's disease (PD) are characterized by loss of dopamine (DA) neurons and typically the formation of protein inclusions containing the alpha-synuclein (alpha-syn) protein. Environmental contributors to PD remain largely unresolved but toxins, such as paraquat or rotenone, represent well-studied enhancers of susceptibility. Previously, we reported that a bacterial metabolite produced by Streptomyces venezuelae caused age- and dose-dependent DA neurodegeneration in Caenorhabditis elegans and human SH-SY5Y neurons. We hypothesized that this metabolite from a common soil bacterium could enhance neurodegeneration in combination with PD susceptibility gene mutations or toxicants. Here, we report that exposure to the metabolite in C. elegans DA neurons expressing human alpha-syn or LRRK2 G2019S exacerbates neurodegeneration. Using the PD toxin models 6-hydroxydopamine and rotenone, we demonstrate that exposure to more than one environmental risk factor has an additive effect in eliciting DA neurodegeneration. Evidence suggests that PD-related toxicants cause mitochondrial dysfunction, thus we examined the impact of the metabolite on mitochondrial activity and oxidative stress. An ex vivo assay of C. elegans extracts revealed that this metabolite causes excessive production of reactive oxygen species. Likewise, enhanced expression of a superoxide dismutase reporter was observed in vivo. The anti-oxidant probucol fully rescued metabolite-induced DA neurodegeneration, as well. Interestingly, the stress-responsive FOXO transcription factor DAF-16 was activated following exposure to the metabolite. Through further mechanistic analysis, we discerned the mitochondrial defects associated with metabolite exposure included adenosine triphosphate impairment and upregulation of the mitochondrial unfolded protein response. Metabolite-induced toxicity in DA neurons was rescued by complex I activators. RNA interference (RNAi) knockdown of mitochondrial complex I subunits resulted in rescue of metabolite-induced toxicity in DA neurons. Taken together, our characterization of cellular responses to the S. venezuelae metabolite indicates that this putative environmental trigger of neurotoxicity may cause cell death, in part, through mitochondrial dysfunction and oxidative stress.
26253449	OBJECTIVE: To further characterize mitochondrial dysfunction in LRRK2(G2019S) mutant Parkinson disease (PD) patient tissue (M-LRRK2(G2019S)), determine whether ursodeoxycholic acid (UDCA) also exerts a beneficial effect on mitochondrial dysfunction in nonmanifesting LRRK2(G2019S) mutation carriers (NM-LRRK2(G2019S)), and assess UDCA for its beneficial effect on neuronal dysfunction in vivo. METHODS: Intracellular adenosine 5'-triphosphate (ATP) levels, oxygen consumption, and activity of the individual complexes of the mitochondrial respiratory chain as well as mitochondrial morphology were measured in M-LRRK2(G2019S), NM-LRRK2(G2019S), and controls. UDCA was assessed for its rescue effect on intracellular ATP levels in NM-LRRK2(G2019S) and in a LRRK2 transgenic fly model with dopaminergic expression of LRRK2(G2019S). RESULTS: Crucial parameters of mitochondrial function were similarly reduced in both M-LRRK2(G2019S) and NM-LRRK2(G2019S) with a specific decrease in respiratory chain complex IV activity. Mitochondrial dysfunction precedes changes in mitochondrial morphology but is normalized after siRNA-mediated knockdown of LRRK2. UDCA improved mitochondrial function in NM-LRRK2(G2019) and rescued the loss of visual function in LRRK2(G2019S) flies. CONCLUSION: There is clear preclinical impairment of mitochondrial function in NM-LRRK2(G2019S) that is distinct from the mitochondrial impairment observed in parkin-related PD. The beneficial effect of UDCA on mitochondrial function in both NM-LRRK2(G2019S) and M-LRRK2(G2019S) as well as on the function of dopaminergic neurons expressing LRRK2(G2019S) suggests that UDCA is a promising drug for future neuroprotective trials.
23664753	Leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) mutation is the most common cause of genetic-related parkinsonism and is usually associated with Lewy body pathology; however, tau, alpha-synuclein, and ubiquitin pathologies have also been reported. We report the case of a patient carrying the LRRK2 G2019S mutation and a novel heterozygous variant c.370C>G, p.Q124E in exon 4 of the microtubule-associated protein tau (MAPT). The patient developed parkinsonism with good levodopa response in her 70s. Neuropathological analysis revealed nigral degeneration and Alzheimer-type tau pathology without Lewy bodies. Immunohistochemical staining using phospho-TDP-43 antibodies identified occasional TDP-43 pathology in the hippocampus, temporal neocortex, striatum, and substantia nigra. However, TDP-43 pathology was not identified in another 4 archival LRRK2 G2019S cases with Lewy body pathology available in the Queen Square Brain Bank. Among other published cases of patients carrying LRRK2 G2019S mutation, only 3 were reportedly evaluated for TDP-43 pathology, and the results were negative. The role of the MAPT variant in the clinical and pathological manifestation in LRRK2 cases remains to be determined.
22612223	Autosomal-dominant missense mutations in LRRK2 (leucine-rich repeat kinase 2) are a common genetic cause of PD (Parkinson's disease). LRRK2 is a multidomain protein with kinase and GTPase activities. Dominant mutations are found in the domains that have these two enzyme activities, including the common G2019S mutation that increases kinase activity 2-3-fold. However, there is also a genetic variant in some populations, G2385R, that lies in a C-terminal WD40 domain of LRRK2 and acts as a risk factor for PD. In the present study we show that the G2385R mutation causes a partial loss of the kinase function of LRRK2 and deletion of the C-terminus completely abolishes kinase activity. This effect is strong enough to overcome the kinase-activating effects of the G2019S mutation in the kinase domain. Hsp90 (heat-shock protein of 90 kDa) has an increased affinity for the G2385R variant compared with WT (wild-type) LRRK2, and inhibition of the chaperone binding combined with proteasome inhibition leads to association of mutant LRRK2 with high molecular mass native fractions that probably represent proteasome degradation pathways. The loss-of-function of G2385R correlates with several cellular phenotypes that have been proposed to be kinase-dependent. These results suggest that the C-terminus of LRRK2 plays an important role in maintaining enzymatic function of the protein and that G2385R may be associated with PD in a way that is different from kinase-activating mutations. These results may be important in understanding the differing mechanism(s) by which mutations in LRRK2 act and may also have implications for therapeutic strategies for PD.
28860483	Genetic variation in the leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) gene is associated with risk of familial and sporadic Parkinson's disease (PD). To support clinical development of LRRK2 inhibitors as disease-modifying treatment in PD biomarkers for kinase activity, target engagement and kinase inhibition are prerequisite tools. In a combined proteomics and phosphoproteomics study on human peripheral mononuclear blood cells (PBMCs) treated with the LRRK2 inhibitor Lu AF58786 a number of putative biomarkers were identified. Among the phospho-site hits were known LRRK2 sites as well as two phospho-sites on human Rab10 and Rab12. LRRK2 dependent phosphorylation of human Rab10 and human Rab12 at positions Thr73 and Ser106, respectively, was confirmed in HEK293 and, more importantly, Rab10-pThr73 inhibition was validated in immune stimulated human PBMCs using two distinct LRRK2 inhibitors. In addition, in non-stimulated human PBMCs acute inhibition of LRRK2 with two distinct LRRK2 inhibitor compounds reduced Rab10-Thr73 phosphorylation in a concentration-dependent manner with apparent IC50's equivalent to IC50's on LRRK2-pSer935. The identification of Rab10 phosphorylated at Thr73 as a LRRK2 inhibition marker in human PBMCs strongly support inclusion of assays quantifying Rab10-pThr73 levels in upcoming clinical trials evaluating LRRK2 kinase inhibition as a disease-modifying treatment principle in PD.
22850484	In spite of a clear genetic link between Parkinson's disease (PD) and mutations in LRRK2, cellular localization and physiological function of LRRK2 remain debated. Here we demonstrate the immunohistochemical localization of LRRK2 in adult mouse and early postnatal mouse brain development. Antibody specificity is verified by absence of specific staining in LRRK2 knockout mouse brain. Although LRRK2 is expressed in various mouse brain regions (i.e. cortex, thalamus, hippocampus, cerebellum), strongest expression is detected in striatum, whereas LRRK2 protein expression in substantia nigra pars compacta in contrast is low. LRRK2 is highly expressed in striatal medium spiny neurons (MSN) and few cholinergic interneurons. LRRK2 expression is undetectable in other interneurons, oligodendrocytes or astrocytes of the striatum. Interestingly, LRRK2 expression is associated with striosome specific markers (i.e. MOR1, RASGRP1). Analysis of LRRK2 expression during early postnatal development and in LRRK2 knockout mice, demonstrates that LRRK2 is not required for generation or maintenance of the striosome compartment. Comparing LRRK2-WT, LRRK2-R1441G transgenic and non-transgenic mice, changes of LRRK2 expression in striosome/matrix compartments can be detected. The findings rule out a specific requirement of LRRK2 in striosome genesis but suggest a functional role for LRRK2 in striosomes.
19535993	Mutations in leucine-rich repeat kinase-2 (LRRK2) are the most common known cause of Parkinson disease, but how this protein results in the pathobiology of Parkinson disease is unknown. Moreover, there is variability in pathology among cases, and alpha-synuclein (alpha-syn) neuronal inclusions are often present, but whether LRRK2 is present in these pathological inclusions is controversial. This study characterizes novel LRRK2 antibodies, some of which preferentially recognize an aggregated form of LRRK2, as observed in cell culture models. Large perinuclear aggregates containing LRRK2 were promoted by proteasome inhibition and prevented by microtubule polymerization inhibition. Furthermore, they were vimentin- and gamma-tubulin- but not lamp1-immunoreactive, suggesting that these structures fit the definition of aggresomes. Inhibition of heat shock protein 90 led to the degradation of only the soluble/cytosolic pool of LRRK2, suggesting that the aggresomes formed independent of the stability provided by the heat shock protein 90. Although these novel anti-LRRK2 antibodies identified aggregates in model cell systems, they did not immunostain pathological inclusions in human brains. Furthermore, coexpression of LRRK2 and alpha-syn did not recruit alpha-syn into aggresomes in cultured cells, even in the presence of proteasome inhibition. Thus, although LRRK2 is a model system for aggresome formation, LRRK2 is not present in alpha-syn pathological inclusions.
26526034	Leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) gene mutations are the most common genetic cause of Parkinson's disease (PD). CSF specimens from LRRK2 + PD patients and healthy LRRK2 mutation carriers are, therefore, useful for biomarker studies. This study examined the hypothesis that differences are present between subjects with sporadic PD (sPD), PD carriers of LRRK2 mutations (LRRK2 + PD), healthy control subjects lacking LRRK2 mutations (CTL), and LRRK2 mutation-carrying healthy controls (LRRK2 + CTL) for CSF concentrations of six potential PD biomarkers. Two of these proteins, nuclear factor (erythroid-derived 2)-like 2 ("Nrf2") and heat shock 70 kDa protein 8 ("HSPA8"), were detected in preliminary ELISAs, then measured in a larger cohort (60 sPD, 10 LRRK2 + PD, 23 CTL, 31 LRRK2 + CTL). No statistically significant differences were found between the groups (Nrf2 p = 0.13, HSPA8 p = 0.21). Nrf2 concentrations in LRRK2 + PD subjects were strongly positively associated with Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale (UPDRS) total and motor scores [Spearman rho = 0.77 (p = 0.012) and 0.83 (p = 0.005)] and negatively associated with Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA) scores (rho = -0.57; p = 0.11). Partial correlation coefficient calculations indicated that disease duration contributed to the associations of Nrf2 levels with UPDRS scores and with MoCA scores in this group. While CSF Nrf2 and HSPA8 do not appear to offer diagnostic biomarkers for PD, the associations between Nrf2 levels and UPDRS scores in LRRK2 + PD patients merit further investigation.
25355420	Parkinson's disease (PD) is characterized by selective degeneration of dopaminergic neurons. Although the etiology of PD remains incompletely understood, oxidative stress has been implicated as an important contributor in the development of PD. Oxidative stress can lead to oxidation and functional perturbation of proteins critical to neuronal survival. Glutaredoxin 1 (Grx1) is an evolutionally conserved antioxidant enzyme that repairs protein oxidation by reversing the oxidative modification of cysteine known as S-glutathionylation. We aimed to explore the regulatory role of Grx1 in PD. We first examined the levels of Grx1 in postmortem midbrain samples from PD patients, and observed that Grx1 content is decreased in PD, specifically within the dopaminergic neurons. We subsequently investigated the potential role of Grx1 deficiency in PD pathogenesis by examining the consequences of loss of the Caenorhabditis elegans Grx1 homolog in well-established worm models of familial PD caused by overexpression of pathogenic human LRRK2 mutants G2019S or R1441C. We found that loss of the Grx1 homolog led to significant exacerbation of the neurodegenerative phenotype in C. elegans overexpressing the human LRRK2 mutants. Re-expression in the dopaminergic neurons of the active, but not a catalytically inactive form of the Grx1 homolog rescued the exacerbated phenotype. Loss of the Grx1 homolog also exacerbated the neurodegenerative phenotype in other C. elegans models, including overexpression of human alpha-synuclein and overexpression of tyrosine hydroxylase (a model of sporadic PD). Therefore, our results reveal a novel neuroprotective role of glutaredoxin against dopaminergic neurodegeneration in models of familial and sporadic PD.
18675914	Leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) is a recently identified gene that, when mutated at specific locations, results in the onset of parkinsonian symptoms with clinical features indistinguishable from idiopathic Parkinson's disease. Based on structural and domain analysis, LRRK2 is predicted to function as a stress-responsive protein scaffold mediating the regulation of mitogen activating protein kinase (MAPK) pathways. Consistent with this notion, our results supported the notion that expression of wild-type LRRK2 but not Y1699C or G2019S mutants enhanced the tolerance of HEK293 and SH-SY5Y cells towards H(2)O(2)-induced oxidative stress. This increase in stress tolerance was dependent on the presence of the kinase domain of the LRRK2 gene and manifested through the activation of the ERK pathway. Collectively, our results indicated that cells expressing LRRK2 mutants suffer a loss of protection normally derived from wild-type LRRK2, making them more vulnerable to oxidative stress.
28407521	Despite intensive research, the etiology of Parkinson's disease (PD) remains poorly understood and the disease remains incurable. However, compelling evidence gathered over decades of research strongly support a role for mitochondrial dysfunction in PD pathogenesis. Related to this, PGC-1alpha, a key regulator of mitochondrial biogenesis, has recently been proposed to be an attractive target for intervention in PD. Here, we showed that silencing of expression of the Drosophila PGC-1alpha ortholog spargel results in PD-related phenotypes in flies and also seem to negate the effects of AMPK activation, which we have previously demonstrated to be neuroprotective, that is, AMPK-mediated neuroprotection appears to require PGC-1alpha. Importantly, we further showed that genetic or pharmacological activation of the Drosophila PGC-1alpha ortholog spargel is sufficient to rescue the disease phenotypes of Parkin and LRRK2 genetic fly models of PD, thus supporting the proposed use of PGC-1alpha-related strategies for neuroprotection in PD.
23577227	There is mounting evidence for a role of mitochondrial dysfunction in the pathogenesis of alpha -synucleinopathies such as Parkinson's disease (PD) and dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB). In particular, recent studies have demonstrated that failure of mitochondrial quality control caused by loss of function of the PTEN-induced kinase 1 (PINK1, PARK6) Parkin (PARK2) pathway may be causative in some familial PD. In sporadic PD, alpha -synuclein aggregation may interfere with mitochondrial function, and this might be further exacerbated by leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2). The majority of these findings have been obtained in Drosophila and cell cultures, whereas the objective of this paper is to discuss our recent results on the axonal pathology of brains derived from transgenic mice expressing alpha -synuclein or DLB-linked P123H beta -synuclein. In line with the current view of the pathogenesis of sporadic PD, mitochondria abnormally accumulated in alpha -synuclein/LRRK2-immunopositive axonal swellings in mice expressing alpha -synuclein. Curiously, neither mitochondria nor LRRK2 was present in the swellings of mice expressing P123H beta -synuclein, suggesting that alpha - and beta -synuclein might play differential roles in the mitochondrial pathology of alpha -synucleinopathies.
27975167	Mutations in PINK1 (PARK6), a serine/threonine kinase involved in mitochondrial homeostasis, are associated with early onset Parkinson's disease. Fibroblasts from Parkinson's disease patients with compound heterozygous mutations in exon 7 (c.1488 + 1G > A; c.1252_1488del) showed no apparent signs of mitochondrial impairment. To elucidate changes primarily caused by lack of functional PINK1, we over-expressed wild-type PINK1, which induced a significant downregulation of LRRK2 (PARK8). Indeed, we found that LRRK2 protein basal levels were significantly higher in the mutant PINK1 fibroblasts. To examine the interaction between the two PARK genes in a disease-relevant cell context, we generated induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC) lines from mutant, carrier and control fibroblasts by lentiviral-mediated re-programming. Efficiency of neural induction and dopamine differentiation using a floor-plate induction protocol was similar in all genotypes. As observed in fibroblasts, PINK1 mutant neurons showed increased LRRK2 expression both at the RNA and protein level and transient over-expression of wild-type PINK1 efficiently downregulated LRRK2 levels. Additionally, we confirmed a dysregulation of LRRK2 expression in fibroblasts from patients with a different homozygous mutation in PINK1 exon 4, c.926G > A (G309D). Thus, our results identify a novel role of PINK1 modulating the levels of LRRK2 in Parkinson's disease fibroblasts and neurons, suggest a convergent pathway for these PARK genes, and broaden the role of LRRK2 in the pathogenesis of Parkinson's disease.
27265751	Although mutations in the leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) gene are the most common cause of genetic Parkinson's disease, their function is largely unknown. LRRK2 is pleiotropic in nature, shown to be involved in neurodegeneration and in more peripheral processes, including kidney functions, in rats and mice. Recent studies in zebrafish have shown conflicting evidence that removal of the LRRK2 WD40 domain may or may not affect dopaminergic neurons and/or locomotion. This study shows that approximately 50% LRRK2 knockdown in zebrafish causes not only neuronal loss but also developmental perturbations such as axis curvature defects, ocular abnormalities, and edema in the eyes, lens, and otic vesicles. We further show that LRRK2 knockdown results in significant neuronal loss, including a reduction of dopaminergic neurons. Immunofluorescence demonstrates that endogenous LRRK2 is expressed in the lens, brain, heart, spinal cord, and kidney (pronephros), which mirror the LRRK2 morphant phenotypes observed. LRRK2 knockdown results further in the concomitant upregulation of beta-synuclein, PARK13, and SOD1 and causes beta-synuclein aggregation in the diencephalon, midbrain, hindbrain, and postoptic commissure. LRRK2 knockdown causes mislocalization of the Na(+) /K(+) ATPase protein in the pronephric ducts, suggesting that the edema might be linked to renal malfunction and that LRRK2 might be associated with pronephric duct epithelial cell differentiation. Combined, our study shows that LRRK2 has multifaceted roles in zebrafish and that zebrafish represent a complementary model to further our understanding of this central protein. (c) 2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
26917005	BACKGROUND: We aimed to determine if peripheral or central inflammatory cytokines are altered in healthy subjects carrying a leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) G2019S mutation, and thus genetically at risk of Parkinson's disease (PD). We also aimed to identify differences in inflammatory cytokines between LRRK2 G2019S-associated and idiopathic PD once the disease manifests. METHODS: Participants were genetically screened and phenotyped, and biological samples were collected and stored by the Michael J. Fox Foundation LRRK2 Cohort Consortium. Serum samples and matching clinical data were obtained from 71 asymptomatic LRRK2 G2019S mutation carriers (CSF n = 25), 75 neurologically normal controls (CSF n = 22), 75 idiopathic PD patients (CSF n = 29), and 76 PD patients with a LRRK2 G2019S mutation (CSF n = 20). Inflammatory cytokines were measured using multiplex enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays. RESULTS: Serum levels of interleukin 1 beta could discriminate asymptomatic LRRK2 G2019S mutation carriers from controls, with a high inflammatory subgroup of carriers identified. This subgroup was significantly higher in a number of PD-implicated pro-inflammatory cytokines. Once PD had manifest, LRRK2 G2019S patients were discriminated from idiopathic PD by higher serum platelet-derived growth factor, and higher CSF vascular endothelial growth factor and interleukin 8. CONCLUSIONS: The results suggest that peripheral inflammation is higher in a percentage of subjects carrying the LRRK2 G2019S mutation. Replication and longitudinal follow-up is required to determine whether the increased peripheral cytokines can predict clinical PD. Importantly, these biological changes were observed prior to the clinical manifestations thought to herald PD. (c) 2016 International Parkinson and Movement Disorder Society.
27054336	Signaling via tumor necrosis factor receptor (TNFR) superfamily members regulates cellular life and death decisions. A subset of mammalian TNFR proteins, most notably the p75 neurotrophin receptor (p75NTR), induces cell death through a pathway that requires activation of c-Jun N-terminal kinases (JNKs). However the receptor-proximal signaling events that mediate this remain unclear. Drosophila express a single tumor necrosis factor (TNF) ligand termed Eiger (Egr) that activates JNK-dependent cell death. We have exploited this model to identify phylogenetically conserved signaling events that allow Egr to induce JNK activation and cell death in vivo. Here we report that Rac1, a small GTPase, is specifically required in Egr-mediated cell death. rac1 loss of function blocks Egr-induced cell death, whereas Rac1 overexpression enhances Egr-induced killing. We identify Vav as a GEF for Rac1 in this pathway and demonstrate that dLRRK functions as a negative regulator of Rac1 that normally acts to constrain Egr-induced death. Thus dLRRK loss of function increases Egr-induced cell death in the fly. We further show that Rac1-dependent entry of Egr into early endosomes is a crucial prerequisite for JNK activation and for cell death and show that this entry requires the activity of Rab21 and Rab7. These findings reveal novel regulatory mechanisms that allow Rac1 to contribute to Egr-induced JNK activation and cell death.
25453831	The Rab GTPases recruit peripheral membrane proteins to intracellular organelles. These Rab effectors typically mediate the motility of organelles and vesicles and contribute to the specificity of membrane traffic. However, for many Rabs, few, if any, effectors have been identified; hence, their role remains unclear. To identify Rab effectors, we used a comprehensive set of Drosophila Rabs for affinity chromatography followed by mass spectrometry to identify the proteins bound to each Rab. For many Rabs, this revealed specific interactions with Drosophila orthologs of known effectors. In addition, we found numerous Rab-specific interactions with known components of membrane traffic as well as with diverse proteins not previously linked to organelles or having no known function. We confirm over 25 interactions for Rab2, Rab4, Rab5, Rab6, Rab7, Rab9, Rab18, Rab19, Rab30, and Rab39. These include tethering complexes, coiled-coiled proteins, motor linkers, Rab regulators, and several proteins linked to human disease.
28819229	Leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) is a large multidomain protein implicated in the pathogenesis of both familial and sporadic Parkinson's disease (PD), and currently one of the most promising therapeutic targets for drug design in Parkinson's disease. In contrast, LRRK1, the closest homologue to LRRK2, does not play any role in PD. Here, we use cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM) and single particle analysis to gain structural insight into the full-length dimeric structures of LRRK2 and LRRK1. Differential scanning fluorimetry-based screening of purification buffers showed that elution of the purified LRRK2 protein in a high pH buffer is beneficial in obtaining high quality cryo-EM images. Next, analysis of the 3D maps generated from the cryo-EM data show 16 and 25 A resolution structures of full length LRRK2 and LRRK1, respectively, revealing the overall shape of the dimers with two-fold symmetric orientations of the protomers that is closely similar between the two proteins. These results suggest that dimerization mechanisms of both LRRKs are closely related and hence that specificities in functions of each LRRK are likely derived from LRRK2 and LRRK1's other biochemical functions. To our knowledge, this study is the first to provide 3D structural insights in LRRK2 and LRRK1 dimers in parallel.
22952686	Leucine-rich repeat kinase 1 and 2 (LRRK1 and LRRK2) are large multidomain proteins containing kinase, GTPase and multiple protein-protein interaction domains, but only mutations in LRRK2 are linked to familial Parkinson's disease (PD). Independent studies suggest that LRRK2 exists in the cell as a complex compatible with the size of a dimer. However, whether this complex is truly a homodimer or a heterologous complex formed by monomeric LRRK2 with other proteins has not been definitively proven due to the limitations in obtaining highly pure proteins suitable for structural characterization. Here, we used stable expression of LRRK1 and LRRK2 in HEK293T cell lines to produce recombinant LRRK1 and LRRK2 proteins of greater than 90% purity. Both purified LRRKs are folded, with a predominantly alpha-helical secondary structure and are capable of binding GTP with similar affinity. Furthermore, recombinant LRRK2 exhibits robust autophosphorylation activity, phosphorylation of model peptides in vitro and ATP binding. In contrast, LRRK1 does not display significant autophosphorylation activity and fails to phosphorylate LRRK2 model substrates, although it does bind ATP. Using these biochemically validated proteins, we show that LRRK1 and LRRK2 are capable of forming homodimers as shown by single-particle transmission electron microscopy and immunogold labeling. These LRRK dimers display an elongated conformation with a mean particle size of 145 A and 175 A respectively, which is disrupted by addition of 6M guanidinium chloride. Immunogold staining revealed double-labeled particles also in the pathological LRRK2 mutant G2019S and artificial mutants disrupting GTPase and kinase activities, suggesting that point mutations do not hinder the dimeric conformation. Overall, our findings indicate for the first time that purified and active LRRK1 and LRRK2 can form dimers in their full-length conformation.
23675505	Missense mutations in the leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 gene (LRRK2) are linked to autosomal dominant forms of Parkinson's disease (PD). In order to get insights into the physiological role of Lrrk2, we examined the distribution of Lrrk2 mRNA and different splice variants in the developing murine embryo and the adult brain of Mus musculus. To analyse if the Lrrk2-paralog, Lrrk1, may have redundant functions in PD-development, we also compared Lrrk1 and Lrrk2 expression in the same tissues. Using radioactive in situ hybridization, we found ubiquitous expression of both genes at low level from embryonic stage E9.5 onward, which progressively increased up until birth. The developing central nervous system (CNS) displayed no prominent Lrrk2 mRNA signals at these time-points. However, in the entire postnatal brain Lrrk2 became detectable, showing strongest level in the striatum and the cortex of adult mice; Lrrk1 was only detectable in the mitral cell layer of the olfactory bulb. Thus, due to the non-overlapping expression patterns, a redundant function of Lrrk2 and Lrrk1 in the pathogenesis of PD seems to be unlikely. Quantification of Lrrk2 mRNA and protein level in several brain regions by real-time PCR and Western blot verified the striatum and cortex as hotspots of postnatal Lrrk2 expression. Strong expression of Lrrk2 is mainly found in neurons, specifically in the dopamine receptor 1 (DRD1a) and 2 (DRD2)-positive subpopulations of the striatal medium spiny neurons. Finally, we identified 2 new splice-variants of Lrrk2 in RNA-samples from various adult brain regions and organs: a variant with a skipped exon 5 and a truncated variant terminating in an alternative exon 42a. In order to identify the origin of these two splice variants, we also analysed primary neural cultures independently and found cell-specific expression patterns for these variants in microglia and astrocytes.
19712061	Mutations in the gene encoding leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) are the most common cause of autosomal-dominant familial and late-onset sporadic Parkinson's disease (PD). LRRK2 is a large multi-domain protein featuring a GTP-binding C-terminal of Ras of complex proteins (ROC) (ROCO) domain combination unique for the ROCO protein family, directly followed by a kinase domain. Dimerization is a well-established phenomenon among protein kinases. Here, we confirm LRRK2 self-interaction, and provide evidence for general homo- and heterodimerization potential among the ROCO kinase family (LRRK2, LRRK1, and death-associated protein kinase 1). The ROCO domain was critically, though not exclusively involved in dimerization, as a LRRK2 deletion mutant lacking the ROCO domain retained dimeric properties. GTP binding did not appear to influence ROCO(LRRK2) self-interaction. Interestingly, ROCO(LRRK2) fragments exerted an inhibitory effect on both wild-type and the elevated G2019S LRRK2 autophosphorylation activity. Insertion of PD mutations into ROCO(LRRK2) reduced self-interaction and led to a reduction of LRRK2 kinase inhibition. Collectively, these results suggest a functional link between ROCO interactions and kinase activity of wild-type and mutant LRRK2. Importantly, our finding of ROCO(LRRK2) fragment-mediated LRRK2 kinase inhibition offers a novel lead for drug design and thus might have important implications for new therapeutic avenues in PD.
20144646	LRRK2 mutations are recognized as the most frequent genetic cause of both familial and sporadic parkinsonism identified to date. A remarkable feature of this form of parkinsonism is the variable penetrance of symptom manifestation resulting in a wide range of age-at-onset in patients. Herein we use a functional approach to identify the Lrrk1 protein as a potential disease modifier demonstrating an interaction and heterodimer formation with Lrrk2. In addition, evaluation of LRRK1 variants in our large Lrrk2 p.G2019S-parkinsonism series from a Tunisian (n=145) identified a missense mutation (p.L416M) resulting in an average 6.2 years younger age at disease onset. In conclusion we show that the interaction of Lrrk1-Lrrk2 can form protein dimers and this interaction may influence the age of symptomatic manifestation in Lrrk2-parkinsonism patients.
22567899	Mutations in the Leucine Reach Repeat Kinase 2 (LRRK2) gene are the most frequent cause of familial Parkinson's disease (PD). Although the precise physiological and pathological role of LRRK2 is unclear, a direct link between mutant LRRK2 and apoptosis has been suggested. Using flow cytometric analysis (PI+Annexin V(FITC)) we showed increased spontaneous apoptosis of peripheral blood lymphocytes in patients with LRRK.2-associated PD compared to controls after 24 (P < 0.016) and 48 (P < 0.031 ) h of incubation (5 % CO2, 37 degrees C). We found the increased FAS mRNA level in peripheral blood lymphocytes of patients with LRRK2-associated PD compared to controls (P < 0.05) and to sporadic PD (sPD) (P < 0.002). Significant difference in FAS expression between patients with LRRK2-associated PD and controls remained after three years and was detected after 1 and 24 h during lymphocyte incubation (P < 0.03 and 0.05, respectively). Increased spontaneous lymphocytes apoptosis along to increased FAS expression in patients with LRRK2-associated PD suggest that LRRK2 mutations may lead to the activation of extrinsic apoptotic way.
24064060	LRRK2 (leucine-rich repeat kinase 2) has been identified as a gene corresponding to PARK8, an autosomal-dominant gene for familial Parkinson's disease (PD). LRRK2 pathogenic-specific mutants induce neurotoxicity and shorten neurites. To elucidate the mechanism underlying LRRK2 expression, we constructed the LRRK2-promoter-luciferase reporter and used it for promoter analysis. We found that the glucocorticoid receptor (GR) transactivated LRRK2 in a ligand-dependent manner. Using quantitative RT-PCR and Western analysis, we further showed that treatment with dexamethasone, a synthetic GR ligand, induced LRRK2 expression at both the transcriptional and translational levels, in dopaminergic MN9D cells. Dexamethasone treatment also increased expression of alpha alpha-synuclein, another PD causative gene, and enhanced transactivation of the alpha-synuclein promoter-luciferase reporter. In addition, dexamethasone treatment to MN9D cells weakly induced cytotoxicity based on an LDH assay. Because glucocorticoid hormones are secreted in response to stress, our data suggest that stress might be a related factor in the pathogenesis of PD.
23526378	To assess the roles of Lrrk1 and Lrrk2, we examined skeletal phenotypes in Lrrk1 and Lrrk2 knockout (KO) mice. Lrrk1 KO mice exhibit severe osteopetrosis caused by dysfunction of multinucleated osteoclasts, reduced bone resorption in endocortical and trabecular regions, and increased bone mineralization. Lrrk1 KO mice have lifelong accumulation of bone and respond normally to the anabolic actions of teriparatide treatment, but are resistant to ovariectomy-induced bone boss. Precursors derived from Lrrk1 KO mice differentiate into multinucleated cells in response to macrophage colony-stimulating factor (M-CSF)/receptor activator of NF-kappaB ligand (RANKL) treatment, but these cells fail to form peripheral sealing zones and ruffled borders, and fail to resorb bone. The phosphorylation of cellular Rous sarcoma oncogene (c-Src) at Tyr-527 is significantly elevated whereas at Tyr-416 is decreased in Lrrk1-deficient osteoclasts. The defective osteoclast function is partially rescued by overexpression of the constitutively active form of Y527F c-Src. Immunoprecipitation assays in osteoclasts detected a physical interaction of Lrrk1 with C-terminal Src kinase (Csk). Lrrk2 KO mice do not show obvious bone phenotypes. Precursors derived from Lrrk2 KO mice differentiate into functional multinucleated osteoclasts. Our finding of osteopetrosis in Lrrk1 KO mice provides convincing evidence that Lrrk1 plays a critical role in negative regulation of bone mass in part through modulating the c-Src signaling pathway in mice.
21220347	The receptor tyrosine kinase MET is frequently amplified in human tumors, resulting in high cell surface densities and constitutive activation even in the absence of growth factor stimulation by its endogenous ligand, hepatocyte growth factor (HGF). We sought to identify mechanisms of signaling crosstalk that promote MET activation by searching for kinases that are coordinately dysregulated with wild-type MET in human tumors. Our bioinformatic analysis identified leucine-rich repeat kinase-2 (LRRK2), which is amplified and overexpressed in papillary renal and thyroid carcinomas. Down-regulation of LRRK2 in cultured tumor cells compromises MET activation and selectively reduces downstream MET signaling to mTOR and STAT3. Loss of these critical mitogenic pathways induces cell cycle arrest and cell death due to loss of ATP production, indicating that MET and LRRK2 cooperate to promote efficient tumor cell growth and survival in these cancers.
23747310	Mutations in LRRK2 are the most common genetic cause of Parkinson's disease (PD). The most prevalent LRRK2 mutation is the G2019S coding change, located in the kinase domain of this complex multi-domain protein. The majority of G2019S autopsy cases feature typical Lewy Body pathology with a clinical phenotype almost indistinguishable from idiopathic PD (iPD). Here we have investigated the biochemical characteristics of alpha-synuclein in G2019S LRRK2 PD post-mortem material, in comparison to pathology-matched iPD. Immunohistochemistry with pS129 alpha-synuclein antibody showed that the medulla is heavily affected with pathology in G2019S PD whilst the basal ganglia (BG), limbic and frontal cortical regions demonstrated comparable pathology scores between G2019S PD and iPD. Significantly lower levels of the highly aggregated alpha-synuclein species in urea-SDS fractions were observed in G2019S cases compared to iPD in the BG and limbic cortex. Our data, albeit from a small number of cases, highlight a difference in the biochemical properties of aggregated alpha-synuclein in G2019S linked PD compared to iPD, despite a similar histopathological presentation. This divergence in solubility is most notable in the basal ganglia, a region that is affected preclinically and is damaged before overt dopaminergic cell death.
27906179	Mitochondrial dysfunction has been linked to the pathogenesis of a large number of inherited diseases in humans, including Parkinson's disease, the second most common neurodegenerative disorder. The Parkinson's disease genes pink1 and parkin, which encode a mitochondrially targeted protein kinase, and an E3 ubiquitin ligase, respectively, participate in a key mitochondrial quality-control pathway that eliminates damaged mitochondria. In the current study, we established an in vivo PINK1/Parkin-induced photoreceptor neuron degeneration model in Drosophila with the aim of dissecting the PINK1/Parkin pathway in detail. Using LC-MS/MS analysis, we identified Serine 346 as the sole autophosphorylation site of Drosophila PINK1 and found that substitution of Serine 346 to Alanine completely abolished the PINK1 autophosphorylation. Disruption of either PINK1 or Parkin phosphorylation impaired the PINK1/Parkin pathway, and the degeneration phenotype of photoreceptor neurons was obviously alleviated. Phosphorylation of PINK1 is not only required for the PINK1-mediated mitochondrial recruitment of Parkin but also induces its kinase activity toward Parkin. In contrast, phosphorylation of Parkin by PINK1 is dispensable for its translocation but required for its activation. Moreover, substitution with autophosphorylation-deficient PINK1 failed to rescue pink1 null mutant phenotypes. Taken together, our findings suggest that autophosphorylation of PINK1 is essential for the mitochondrial translocation of Parkin and for subsequent phosphorylation and activation of Parkin.
24901221	Two genes linked to early onset Parkinson's disease, PINK1 and Parkin, encode a protein kinase and a ubiquitin-ligase, respectively. Both enzymes have been suggested to support mitochondrial quality control. We have reported that Parkin is phosphorylated at Ser65 within the ubiquitin-like domain by PINK1 in mammalian cultured cells. However, it remains unclear whether Parkin phosphorylation is involved in mitochondrial maintenance and activity of dopaminergic neurons in vivo. Here, we examined the effects of Parkin phosphorylation in Drosophila, in which the phosphorylation residue is conserved at Ser94. Morphological changes of mitochondria caused by the ectopic expression of wild-type Parkin in muscle tissue and brain dopaminergic neurons disappeared in the absence of PINK1. In contrast, phosphomimetic Parkin accelerated mitochondrial fragmentation or aggregation and the degradation of mitochondrial proteins regardless of PINK1 activity, suggesting that the phosphorylation of Parkin boosts its ubiquitin-ligase activity. A non-phosphorylated form of Parkin fully rescued the muscular mitochondrial degeneration due to the loss of PINK1 activity, whereas the introduction of the non-phosphorylated Parkin mutant in Parkin-null flies led to the emergence of abnormally fused mitochondria in the muscle tissue. Manipulating the Parkin phosphorylation status affected spontaneous dopamine release in the nerve terminals of dopaminergic neurons, the survivability of dopaminergic neurons and flight activity. Our data reveal that Parkin phosphorylation regulates not only mitochondrial function but also the neuronal activity of dopaminergic neurons in vivo, suggesting that the appropriate regulation of Parkin phosphorylation is important for muscular and dopaminergic functions.
27336715	Mutations in PINK1 and PARKIN cause early-onset Parkinson's disease (PD), thought to be due to mitochondrial toxicity. Here, we show that in Drosophila pink1 and parkin mutants, defective mitochondria also give rise to endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress signalling, specifically to the activation of the protein kinase R-like endoplasmic reticulum kinase (PERK) branch of the unfolded protein response (UPR). We show that enhanced ER stress signalling in pink1 and parkin mutants is mediated by mitofusin bridges, which occur between defective mitochondria and the ER. Reducing mitofusin contacts with the ER is neuroprotective, through suppression of PERK signalling, while mitochondrial dysfunction remains unchanged. Further, both genetic inhibition of dPerk-dependent ER stress signalling and pharmacological inhibition using the PERK inhibitor GSK2606414 were neuroprotective in both pink1 and parkin mutants. We conclude that activation of ER stress by defective mitochondria is neurotoxic in pink1 and parkin flies and that the reduction of this signalling is neuroprotective, independently of defective mitochondria. A video abstract for this article is available online in the supplementary information.
16672981	Parkinson's disease is the second most common neurodegenerative disorder and is characterized by the degeneration of dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra. Mitochondrial dysfunction has been implicated as an important trigger for Parkinson's disease-like pathogenesis because exposure to environmental mitochondrial toxins leads to Parkinson's disease-like pathology. Recently, multiple genes mediating familial forms of Parkinson's disease have been identified, including PTEN-induced kinase 1 (PINK1; PARK6) and parkin (PARK2), which are also associated with sporadic forms of Parkinson's disease. PINK1 encodes a putative serine/threonine kinase with a mitochondrial targeting sequence. So far, no in vivo studies have been reported for pink1 in any model system. Here we show that removal of Drosophila PINK1 homologue (CG4523; hereafter called pink1) function results in male sterility, apoptotic muscle degeneration, defects in mitochondrial morphology and increased sensitivity to multiple stresses including oxidative stress. Pink1 localizes to mitochondria, and mitochondrial cristae are fragmented in pink1 mutants. Expression of human PINK1 in the Drosophila testes restores male fertility and normal mitochondrial morphology in a portion of pink1 mutants, demonstrating functional conservation between human and Drosophila Pink1. Loss of Drosophila parkin shows phenotypes similar to loss of pink1 function. Notably, overexpression of parkin rescues the male sterility and mitochondrial morphology defects of pink1 mutants, whereas double mutants removing both pink1 and parkin function show muscle phenotypes identical to those observed in either mutant alone. These observations suggest that pink1 and parkin function, at least in part, in the same pathway, with pink1 functioning upstream of parkin. The role of the pink1-parkin pathway in regulating mitochondrial function underscores the importance of mitochondrial dysfunction as a central mechanism of Parkinson's disease pathogenesis.
26035866	Loss of mitochondrial function often leads to neurodegeneration and is thought to be one of the underlying causes of neurodegenerative diseases such as Parkinson's disease (PD). However, the precise events linking mitochondrial dysfunction to neuronal death remain elusive. PTEN-induced putative kinase 1 (PINK1) and Parkin (Park), either of which, when mutated, are responsible for early-onset PD, mark individual mitochondria for destruction at the mitochondrial outer membrane. The specific molecular pathways that regulate signaling between the nucleus and mitochondria to sense mitochondrial dysfunction under normal physiological conditions are not well understood. Here, we show that Drosophila Clueless (Clu), a highly conserved protein required for normal mitochondrial function, can associate with Translocase of the outer membrane (TOM) 20, Porin and PINK1, and is thus located at the mitochondrial outer membrane. Previously, we found that clu genetically interacts with park in Drosophila female germ cells. Here, we show that clu also genetically interacts with PINK1, and our epistasis analysis places clu downstream of PINK1 and upstream of park. In addition, Clu forms a complex with PINK1 and Park, further supporting that Clu links mitochondrial function with the PINK1-Park pathway. Lack of Clu causes PINK1 and Park to interact with each other, and clu mutants have decreased mitochondrial protein levels, suggesting that Clu can act as a negative regulator of the PINK1-Park pathway. Taken together, these results suggest that Clu directly modulates mitochondrial function, and that Clu's function contributes to the PINK1-Park pathway of mitochondrial quality control.
23328674	Mitochondrial dysfunction caused by protein aggregation has been shown to have an important role in neurological diseases, such as Parkinson's disease (PD). Mitochondria have evolved at least two levels of defence mechanisms that ensure their integrity and the viability of their host cell. First, molecular quality control, through the upregulation of mitochondrial chaperones and proteases, guarantees the clearance of damaged proteins. Second, organellar quality control ensures the clearance of defective mitochondria through their selective autophagy. Studies in Drosophila have highlighted mitochondrial dysfunction linked with the loss of the PTEN-induced putative kinase 1 (PINK1) as a mechanism of PD pathogenesis. The mitochondrial chaperone TNF receptor-associated protein 1 (TRAP1) was recently reported to be a cellular substrate for the PINK1 kinase. Here, we characterise Drosophila Trap1 null mutants and describe the genetic analysis of Trap1 function with Pink1 and parkin. We show that loss of Trap1 results in a decrease in mitochondrial function and increased sensitivity to stress, and that its upregulation in neurons of Pink1 mutant rescues mitochondrial impairment. Additionally, the expression of Trap1 was able to partially rescue mitochondrial impairment in parkin mutant flies; and conversely, expression of parkin rescued mitochondrial impairment in Trap1 mutants. We conclude that Trap1 works downstream of Pink1 and in parallel with parkin in Drosophila, and that enhancing its function may ameliorate mitochondrial dysfunction and rescue neurodegeneration in PD.
21151955	PTEN-induced kinase 1 (PINK1), which is required for mitochondrial homeostasis, is a gene product responsible for early-onset Parkinson's disease (PD). Another early onset PD gene product, Parkin, has been suggested to function downstream of the PINK1 signalling pathway based on genetic studies in Drosophila. PINK1 is a serine/threonine kinase with a predicted mitochondrial target sequence and a probable transmembrane domain at the N-terminus, while Parkin is a RING-finger protein with ubiquitin-ligase (E3) activity. However, how PINK1 and Parkin regulate mitochondrial activity is largely unknown. To explore the molecular mechanism underlying the interaction between PINK1 and Parkin, we biochemically purified PINK1-binding proteins from human cultured cells and screened the genes encoding these binding proteins using Drosophila PINK1 (dPINK1) models to isolate a molecule(s) involved in the PINK1 pathology. Here we report that a PINK1-binding mitochondrial protein, PGAM5, modulates the PINK1 pathway. Loss of Drosophila PGAM5 (dPGAM5) can suppress the muscle degeneration, motor defects, and shorter lifespan that result from dPINK1 inactivation and that can be attributed to mitochondrial degeneration. However, dPGAM5 inactivation fails to modulate the phenotypes of parkin mutant flies. Conversely, ectopic expression of dPGAM5 exacerbated the dPINK1 and Drosophila parkin (dParkin) phenotypes. These results suggest that PGAM5 negatively regulates the PINK1 pathway related to maintenance of the mitochondria and, furthermore, that PGAM5 acts between PINK1 and Parkin, or functions independently of Parkin downstream of PINK1.
19056353	The two Parkinson's disease (PD) genes, PTEN-induced kinase 1 (PINK1) and parkin, are linked in a common pathway which affects mitochondrial integrity and function. However, it is still not known what this pathway does in the mitochondria. Therefore, we investigated its physiological function in Drosophila. Because Drosophila PINK1 and parkin mutants show changes in mitochondrial morphology in both indirect flight muscles and dopaminergic neurons, we here investigated whether the PINK1-Parkin pathway genetically interacts with the regulators of mitochondrial fusion and fission such as Drp1, which promotes mitochondrial fission, and Opa1 or Marf, which induces mitochondrial fusion. Surprisingly, DrosophilaPINK1 and parkin mutant phenotypes were markedly suppressed by overexpression of Drp1 or downregulation of Opa1 or Marf, indicating that the PINK1-Parkin pathway regulates mitochondrial remodeling process in the direction of promoting mitochondrial fission. Therefore, we strongly suggest that mitochondrial fusion and fission process could be a prominent therapeutic target for the treatment of PD.
20194754	Loss of the E3 ubiquitin ligase Parkin causes early onset Parkinson's disease, a neurodegenerative disorder of unknown etiology. Parkin has been linked to multiple cellular processes including protein degradation, mitochondrial homeostasis, and autophagy; however, its precise role in pathogenesis is unclear. Recent evidence suggests that Parkin is recruited to damaged mitochondria, possibly affecting mitochondrial fission and/or fusion, to mediate their autophagic turnover. The precise mechanism of recruitment and the ubiquitination target are unclear. Here we show in Drosophila cells that PINK1 is required to recruit Parkin to dysfunctional mitochondria and promote their degradation. Furthermore, PINK1 and Parkin mediate the ubiquitination of the profusion factor Mfn on the outer surface of mitochondria. Loss of Drosophila PINK1 or parkin causes an increase in Mfn abundance in vivo and concomitant elongation of mitochondria. These findings provide a molecular mechanism by which the PINK1/Parkin pathway affects mitochondrial fission/fusion as suggested by previous genetic interaction studies. We hypothesize that Mfn ubiquitination may provide a mechanism by which terminally damaged mitochondria are labeled and sequestered for degradation by autophagy.
16672980	Autosomal recessive juvenile parkinsonism (AR-JP) is an early-onset form of Parkinson's disease characterized by motor disturbances and dopaminergic neurodegeneration. To address its underlying molecular pathogenesis, we generated and characterized loss-of-function mutants of Drosophila PTEN-induced putative kinase 1 (PINK1), a novel AR-JP-linked gene. Here, we show that PINK1 mutants exhibit indirect flight muscle and dopaminergic neuronal degeneration accompanied by locomotive defects. Furthermore, transmission electron microscopy analysis and a rescue experiment with Drosophila Bcl-2 demonstrated that mitochondrial dysfunction accounts for the degenerative changes in all phenotypes of PINK1 mutants. Notably, we also found that PINK1 mutants share marked phenotypic similarities with parkin mutants. Transgenic expression of Parkin markedly ameliorated all PINK1 loss-of-function phenotypes, but not vice versa, suggesting that Parkin functions downstream of PINK1. Taken together, our genetic evidence clearly establishes that Parkin and PINK1 act in a common pathway in maintaining mitochondrial integrity and function in both muscles and dopaminergic neurons.
22242018	Pink1 is a mitochondrial kinase involved in Parkinson's disease, and loss of Pink1 function affects mitochondrial morphology via a pathway involving Parkin and components of the mitochondrial remodeling machinery. Pink1 loss also affects the enzymatic activity of isolated Complex I of the electron transport chain (ETC); however, the primary defect in pink1 mutants is unclear. We tested the hypothesis that ETC deficiency is upstream of other pink1-associated phenotypes. We expressed Saccaromyces cerevisiae Ndi1p, an enzyme that bypasses ETC Complex I, or sea squirt Ciona intestinalis AOX, an enzyme that bypasses ETC Complex III and IV, in pink1 mutant Drosophila and find that expression of Ndi1p, but not of AOX, rescues pink1-associated defects. Likewise, loss of function of subunits that encode for Complex I-associated proteins displays many of the pink1-associated phenotypes, and these defects are rescued by Ndi1p expression. Conversely, expression of Ndi1p fails to rescue any of the parkin mutant phenotypes. Additionally, unlike pink1 mutants, fly parkin mutants do not show reduced enzymatic activity of Complex I, indicating that Ndi1p acts downstream or parallel to Pink1, but upstream or independent of Parkin. Furthermore, while increasing mitochondrial fission or decreasing mitochondrial fusion rescues mitochondrial morphological defects in pink1 mutants, these manipulations fail to significantly rescue the reduced enzymatic activity of Complex I, indicating that functional defects observed at the level of Complex I enzymatic activity in pink1 mutant mitochondria do not arise from morphological defects. Our data indicate a central role for Complex I dysfunction in pink1-associated defects, and our genetic analyses with heterologous ETC enzymes suggest that Ndi1p-dependent NADH dehydrogenase activity largely acts downstream of, or in parallel to, Pink1 but upstream of Parkin and mitochondrial remodeling.
22396657	Mutations in Pten-induced kinase 1 (PINK1) are linked to early-onset familial Parkinson's disease (FPD). PINK1 has previously been implicated in mitochondrial fission/fusion dynamics, quality control, and electron transport chain function. However, it is not clear how these processes are interconnected and whether they are sufficient to explain all aspects of PINK1 pathogenesis. Here we show that PINK1 also controls mitochondrial motility. In Drosophila, downregulation of dMiro or other components of the mitochondrial transport machinery rescued dPINK1 mutant phenotypes in the muscle and dopaminergic (DA) neurons, whereas dMiro overexpression alone caused DA neuron loss. dMiro protein level was increased in dPINK1 mutant but decreased in dPINK1 or dParkin overexpression conditions. In Drosophila larval motor neurons, overexpression of dPINK1 inhibited axonal mitochondria transport in both anterograde and retrograde directions, whereas dPINK1 knockdown promoted anterograde transport. In HeLa cells, overexpressed hPINK1 worked together with hParkin, another FPD gene, to regulate the ubiquitination and degradation of hMiro1 and hMiro2, apparently in a Ser-156 phosphorylation-independent manner. Also in HeLa cells, loss of hMiro promoted the perinuclear clustering of mitochondria and facilitated autophagy of damaged mitochondria, effects previously associated with activation of the PINK1/Parkin pathway. These newly identified functions of PINK1/Parkin and Miro in mitochondrial transport and mitophagy contribute to our understanding of the complex interplays in mitochondrial quality control that are critically involved in PD pathogenesis, and they may explain the peripheral neuropathy symptoms seen in some PD patients carrying particular PINK1 or Parkin mutations. Moreover, the different effects of loss of PINK1 function on Miro protein level in Drosophila and mouse cells may offer one explanation of the distinct phenotypic manifestations of PINK1 mutants in these two species.
25474007	The kinase PINK1 and the E3 ubiquitin (Ub) ligase Parkin participate in mitochondrial quality control. The phosphorylation of Ser65 in Parkin's ubiquitin-like (UBl) domain by PINK1 stimulates Parkin activation and translocation to damaged mitochondria, which induces mitophagy generating polyUb chain. However, Parkin Ser65 phosphorylation is insufficient for Parkin mitochondrial translocation. Here we report that Ser65 in polyUb chain is also phosphorylated by PINK1, and that phosphorylated polyUb chain on mitochondria tethers Parkin at mitochondria. The expression of Tom70MTS-4xUb SE, which mimics phospho-Ser65 polyUb chains on the mitochondria, activated Parkin E3 activity and its mitochondrial translocation. An E3-dead form of Parkin translocated to mitochondria with reduced membrane potential in the presence of Tom70(MTS)-4xUb SE, whereas non-phospho-polyUb mutant Tom70(MTS)-4xUb SA abrogated Parkin translocation. Parkin binds to the phospho-polyUb chain through its RING1-In-Between-RING (IBR) domains, but its RING0-linker is also required for mitochondrial translocation. Moreover, the expression of Tom70(MTS)-4xUb SE improved mitochondrial degeneration in PINK1-deficient, but not Parkin-deficient, Drosophila. Our study suggests that the phosphorylation of mitochondrial polyUb by PINK1 is implicated in both Parkin activation and mitochondrial translocation, predicting a chain reaction mechanism of mitochondrial phospho-polyUb production by which rapid translocation of Parkin is achieved.
23498974	Mutations in VCP cause multisystem degeneration impacting the nervous system, muscle, and/or bone. Patients may present with ALS, Parkinsonism, frontotemporal dementia, myopathy, Paget's disease, or a combination of these. The disease mechanism is unknown. We developed a Drosophila model of VCP mutation-dependent degeneration. The phenotype is reminiscent of PINK1 and parkin mutants, including a pronounced mitochondrial defect. Indeed, VCP interacts genetically with the PINK1/parkin pathway in vivo. Paradoxically, VCP complements PINK1 deficiency but not parkin deficiency. The basis of this paradox is resolved by mechanistic studies in vitro showing that VCP recruitment to damaged mitochondria requires Parkin-mediated ubiquitination of mitochondrial targets. VCP recruitment coincides temporally with mitochondrial fission, and VCP is required for proteasome-dependent degradation of Mitofusins in vitro and in vivo. Further, VCP and its adaptor Npl4/Ufd1 are required for clearance of damaged mitochondria via the PINK1/Parkin pathway, and this is impaired by pathogenic mutations in VCP.
22378780	PTEN-induced kinase 1 (PINK1), which is associated with early onset Parkinson disease, encodes a serine-threonine kinase that is critical for maintaining mitochondrial function. Moreover, another Parkinson disease-linked gene, parkin, functions downstream of PINK1 in protecting mitochondria and dopaminergic (DA) neuron. In our fly genetic screening, knockdown of Sir2 blocked PINK1 overexpression-induced phenotypes. Consistently, ectopic expression of Sir2 successfully rescued mitochondrial defects in PINK1 null mutants, but unexpectedly, failed in parkin mutants. In further genetic analyses, deletion of FOXO nullified the Sir2-induced mitochondrial restoration in PINK1 null mutants. Moreover, overexpression of FOXO or its downstream target gene such as SOD2 or Thor markedly ameliorated PINK1 loss-of-function defects, suggesting that FOXO mediates the mitochondrial protecting signal induced by Sir2. Consistent with its mitochondria-protecting role, Sir2 expression prevented the DA neuron loss of PINK1 null mutants in a FOXO-dependent manner. Loss of Sir2 or FOXO induced DA neuron degeneration, which is very similar to that of PINK1 null mutants. Furthermore, PINK1 deletion had no deleterious effect on the DA neuron loss in Sir2 or FOXO mutants, supporting the idea that Sir2, FOXO, and PINK1 protect DA neuron in a common pathway. Overall, these results strongly support the role of Sir2 and FOXO in preventing mitochondrial dysfunction and DA neuron loss, further suggesting that Sir2 and FOXO function downstream of PINK1 and independently of Parkin.
22078885	Cells keep their energy balance and avoid oxidative stress by regulating mitochondrial movement, distribution, and clearance. We report here that two Parkinson's disease proteins, the Ser/Thr kinase PINK1 and ubiquitin ligase Parkin, participate in this regulation by arresting mitochondrial movement. PINK1 phosphorylates Miro, a component of the primary motor/adaptor complex that anchors kinesin to the mitochondrial surface. The phosphorylation of Miro activates proteasomal degradation of Miro in a Parkin-dependent manner. Removal of Miro from the mitochondrion also detaches kinesin from its surface. By preventing mitochondrial movement, the PINK1/Parkin pathway may quarantine damaged mitochondria prior to their clearance. PINK1 has been shown to act upstream of Parkin, but the mechanism corresponding to this relationship has not been known. We propose that PINK1 phosphorylation of substrates triggers the subsequent action of Parkin and the proteasome.
18799731	Mutations in PTEN-induced kinase 1 (pink1) or parkin cause autosomal-recessive and some sporadic forms of Parkinson's disease. pink1 acts upstream of parkin in a common genetic pathway to regulate mitochondrial integrity in Drosophila. Mitochondrial morphology is maintained by a dynamic balance between the opposing actions of mitochondrial fusion, controlled by Mitofusin (mfn) and Optic atrophy 1 (opa1), and mitochondrial fission, controlled by drp1. Here, we explore interactions between pink1/parkin and the mitochondrial fusion/fission machinery. Muscle-specific knockdown of the fly homologue of Mfn (Marf) or opa1, or overexpression of drp1, results in significant mitochondrial fragmentation. Mfn-knockdown flies also display altered cristae morphology. Interestingly, knockdown of Mfn or opa1 or overexpression of drp1, rescues the phenotypes of muscle degeneration, cell death, and mitochondrial abnormalities in pink1 or parkin mutants. In the male germline, we also observe genetic interactions between pink1 and the testes-specific mfn homologue fuzzy onion, and between pink1 and drp1. Our data suggest that the pink1/parkin pathway promotes mitochondrial fission and/or inhibits fusion by negatively regulating mfn and opa1 function, and/or positively regulating drp1. However, pink1 and parkin mutant flies show distinct mitochondrial phenotypes from drp1 mutant flies, and flies carrying a heterozygous mutation in drp1 enhance the pink1-null phenotype, resulting in lethality. These results suggest that pink1 and parkin are likely not core components of the drp1-mediated mitochondrial fission machinery. Modification of fusion and fission may represent a novel therapeutic strategy for Parkinson's disease.
24784582	PINK1 (PTEN induced putative kinase 1) and PARKIN (also known as PARK2) have been identified as the causal genes responsible for hereditary recessive early-onset Parkinsonism. PINK1 is a Ser/Thr kinase that specifically accumulates on depolarized mitochondria, whereas parkin is an E3 ubiquitin ligase that catalyses ubiquitin transfer to mitochondrial substrates. PINK1 acts as an upstream factor for parkin and is essential both for the activation of latent E3 parkin activity and for recruiting parkin onto depolarized mitochondria. Recently, mechanistic insights into mitochondrial quality control mediated by PINK1 and parkin have been revealed, and PINK1-dependent phosphorylation of parkin has been reported. However, the requirement of PINK1 for parkin activation was not bypassed by phosphomimetic parkin mutation, and how PINK1 accelerates the E3 activity of parkin on damaged mitochondria is still obscure. Here we report that ubiquitin is the genuine substrate of PINK1. PINK1 phosphorylated ubiquitin at Ser 65 both in vitro and in cells, and a Ser 65 phosphopeptide derived from endogenous ubiquitin was only detected in cells in the presence of PINK1 and following a decrease in mitochondrial membrane potential. Unexpectedly, phosphomimetic ubiquitin bypassed PINK1-dependent activation of a phosphomimetic parkin mutant in cells. Furthermore, phosphomimetic ubiquitin accelerates discharge of the thioester conjugate formed by UBCH7 (also known as UBE2L3) and ubiquitin (UBCH7 approximately ubiquitin) in the presence of parkin in vitro, indicating that it acts allosterically. The phosphorylation-dependent interaction between ubiquitin and parkin suggests that phosphorylated ubiquitin unlocks autoinhibition of the catalytic cysteine. Our results show that PINK1-dependent phosphorylation of both parkin and ubiquitin is sufficient for full activation of parkin E3 activity. These findings demonstrate that phosphorylated ubiquitin is a parkin activator.
25565208	Mitochondria play essential roles in many aspects of biology, and their dysfunction has been linked to diverse diseases. Central to mitochondrial function is oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS), accomplished by respiratory chain complexes (RCCs) encoded by nuclear and mitochondrial genomes. How RCC biogenesis is regulated in metazoans is poorly understood. Here we show that Parkinson's disease (PD)-associated genes PINK1 and Parkin direct localized translation of certain nuclear-encoded RCC (nRCC) mRNAs. Translationally repressed nRCC mRNAs are localized in a PINK1/Tom20-dependent manner to mitochondrial outer membrane, where they are derepressed and activated by PINK1/Parkin through displacement of translation repressors, including Pumilio and Glorund/hnRNP-F, a Parkin substrate, and enhanced binding of activators such as eIF4G. Inhibiting the translation repressors rescued nRCC mRNA translation and neuromuscular-degeneration phenotypes of PINK1 mutant, whereas inhibiting eIF4G had opposite effects. Our results reveal previously unknown functions of PINK1/Parkin in RNA metabolism and suggest new approaches to mitochondrial restoration and disease intervention.
23525905	PTEN-induced kinase 1 (PINK1) is a serine/threonine kinase that is localized to mitochondria. It protects cells from oxidative stress by suppressing mitochondrial cytochrome c release, thereby preventing cell death. Mutations in Pink1 cause early-onset Parkinson's disease (PD). Consistently, mitochondrial function is impaired in Pink1-linked PD patients and model systems. Previously, in vitro analysis implied that the protective effects of PINK1 depend on phosphorylation of the downstream factor, TNF receptor-associated protein 1 (TRAP1). Furthermore, TRAP1 has been shown to mitigate alpha-Synuclein-induced toxicity, linking alpha-Synuclein directly to mitochondrial dysfunction. These data suggest that TRAP1 seems to mediate protective effects on mitochondrial function in pathways that are affected in PD. Here we investigated the potential of TRAP1 to rescue dysfunction induced by either PINK1 or Parkin deficiency in vivo and in vitro. We show that overexpression of human TRAP1 is able to mitigate Pink1 but not parkin loss-of-function phenotypes in Drosophila. In addition, detrimental effects observed after RNAi-mediated silencing of complex I subunits were rescued by TRAP1 in Drosophila. Moreover, TRAP1 was able to rescue mitochondrial fragmentation and dysfunction upon siRNA-induced silencing of Pink1 but not parkin in human neuronal SH-SY5Y cells. Thus, our data suggest a functional role of TRAP1 in maintaining mitochondrial integrity downstream of PINK1 and complex I deficits but parallel to or upstream of Parkin.
20383334	Loss-of-function mutations in the PINK1 or parkin genes result in recessive heritable forms of parkinsonism. Genetic studies of Drosophila orthologs of PINK1 and parkin indicate that PINK1, a mitochondrially targeted serine/threonine kinase, acts upstream of Parkin, a cytosolic ubiquitin-protein ligase, to promote mitochondrial fragmentation, although the molecular mechanisms by which the PINK1/Parkin pathway promotes mitochondrial fragmentation are unknown. We tested the hypothesis that PINK1 and Parkin promote mitochondrial fragmentation by targeting core components of the mitochondrial morphogenesis machinery for ubiquitination. We report that the steady-state abundance of the mitochondrial fusion-promoting factor Mitofusin (dMfn) is inversely correlated with the activity of PINK1 and Parkin in Drosophila. We further report that dMfn is ubiquitinated in a PINK1- and Parkin-dependent fashion and that dMfn co-immunoprecipitates with Parkin. By contrast, perturbations of PINK1 or Parkin did not influence the steady-state abundance of the mitochondrial fission-promoting factor Drp1 or the mitochondrial fusion-promoting factor Opa1, or the subcellular distribution of Drp1. Our findings suggest that dMfn is a direct substrate of the PINK1/Parkin pathway and that the mitochondrial morphological alterations and tissue degeneration phenotypes that derive from mutations in PINK1 and parkin result at least in part from reduced ubiquitin-mediated turnover of dMfn.
24878071	Autosomal recessive early-onset Parkinson's disease is most often caused by mutations in the genes encoding the cytosolic E3 ubiquitin ligase Parkin and the mitochondrial serine/threonine kinase PINK1. Studies in Drosophila models and mammalian cells have demonstrated that these proteins regulate various aspects of mitochondrial physiology, including organelle transport, dynamics and turnover. How PINK1 and Parkin orchestrate these processes, and whether they always do so within a common pathway remain to be clarified. We have revisited the role of PINK1 and Parkin in mitochondrial dynamics, and explored its relation to the mitochondrial clearance program controlled by these proteins. We show that PINK1 and Parkin promote Drp1-dependent mitochondrial fission by mechanisms that are at least in part independent. Parkin-mediated mitochondrial fragmentation was abolished by treatments interfering with the calcium/calmodulin/calcineurin signaling pathway, suggesting that it requires dephosphorylation of serine 637 of Drp1. Parkinson's disease-causing mutations with differential impact on mitochondrial morphology and organelle degradation demonstrated that the pro-fission effect of Parkin is not required for efficient mitochondrial clearance. In contrast, the use of Forster energy transfer imaging microscopy revealed that Drp1 and Parkin are co-recruited to mitochondria in proximity of PINK1 following mitochondrial depolarization, indicating spatial coordination between these events in mitochondrial degradation. Our results also hint at a major role of the outer mitochondrial adaptor MiD51 in Drp1 recruitment and Parkin-dependent mitophagy. Altogether, our observations provide new insight into the mechanisms underlying the regulation of mitochondrial dynamics by Parkin and its relation to the mitochondrial clearance program mediated by the PINK1/Parkin pathway.
24751536	PINK1 kinase activates the E3 ubiquitin ligase Parkin to induce selective autophagy of damaged mitochondria. However, it has been unclear how PINK1 activates and recruits Parkin to mitochondria. Although PINK1 phosphorylates Parkin, other PINK1 substrates appear to activate Parkin, as the mutation of all serine and threonine residues conserved between Drosophila and human, including Parkin S65, did not wholly impair Parkin translocation to mitochondria. Using mass spectrometry, we discovered that endogenous PINK1 phosphorylated ubiquitin at serine 65, homologous to the site phosphorylated by PINK1 in Parkin's ubiquitin-like domain. Recombinant TcPINK1 directly phosphorylated ubiquitin and phospho-ubiquitin activated Parkin E3 ubiquitin ligase activity in cell-free assays. In cells, the phosphomimetic ubiquitin mutant S65D bound and activated Parkin. Furthermore, expression of ubiquitin S65A, a mutant that cannot be phosphorylated by PINK1, inhibited Parkin translocation to damaged mitochondria. These results explain a feed-forward mechanism of PINK1-mediated initiation of Parkin E3 ligase activity.
24157867	Autophagy is a critical regulator of organellar homeostasis, particularly of mitochondria. Upon the loss of membrane potential, dysfunctional mitochondria are selectively removed by autophagy through recruitment of the E3 ligase Parkin by the PTEN-induced kinase 1 (PINK1) and subsequent ubiquitination of mitochondrial membrane proteins. Mammalian sequestrome-1 (p62/SQSTM1) is an autophagy adaptor, which has been proposed to shuttle ubiquitinated cargo for autophagic degradation downstream of Parkin. Here, we show that loss of ref(2)P, the Drosophila orthologue of mammalian P62, results in abnormalities, including mitochondrial defects and an accumulation of mitochondrial DNA with heteroplasmic mutations, correlated with locomotor defects. Furthermore, we show that expression of Ref(2)P is able to ameliorate the defects caused by loss of Pink1 and that this depends on the presence of functional Parkin. Finally, we show that both the PB1 and UBA domains of Ref(2)P are crucial for mitochondrial clustering. We conclude that Ref(2)P is a crucial downstream effector of a pathway involving Pink1 and Parkin and is responsible for the maintenance of a viable pool of cellular mitochondria by promoting their aggregation and autophagic clearance.
23449626	Parkinson's disease (PD) is a common neurodegenerative disorder characterized by selective dopaminergic cell loss in the substantia nigra, but its pathogenesis remains unclear. The recessively inherited familial PD genes PARK2 and PARK6 have been attributed to mutations in the Parkin and PTEN-induced kinase 1 (PINK1) genes, respectively. Recent reports suggest that PINK1 works upstream of Parkin in the same pathway to regulate mitochondrial dynamics and/or conduct autophagic clearance of damaged mitochondria. This phenomenon is preserved from Drosophila to human cell lines but has not been demonstrated in a vertebrate animal model in vivo. Here, we developed a medaka fish (Oryzias latipes) model that is deficient in Pink1 and Parkin. We found that despite the lack of a conspicuous phenotype in single mutants for Pink1 or Parkin, medaka that are deficient in both genes developed phenotypes similar to that of human PD: late-onset locomotor dysfunction, a decrease in dopamine levels and a selective degeneration of dopaminergic neurons. Further analysis also revealed defects in mitochondrial enzymatic activity as well as cell death. Consistently, PINK1 and Parkin double-deficient MEF showed a further decrease in mitochondrial membrane potential and mitochondrial complex I activity as well as apoptosis compared with single-deficient MEF. Interestingly, these mitochondrial abnormalities in Parkin-deficient MEF were compensated by exogenous PINK1, but not by disease-related mutants. These results suggest that PINK1 and Parkin work in a complementary way to protect dopaminergic neurons by maintaining mitochondrial function in vertebrates.
24874806	Loss-of-function mutations in PINK1, which encodes a mitochondrially targeted serine/threonine kinase, result in an early-onset heritable form of Parkinson's disease. Previous work has shown that PINK1 is constitutively degraded in healthy cells, but selectively accumulates on the surface of depolarized mitochondria, thereby initiating their autophagic degradation. Although PINK1 is known to be a cleavage target of several mitochondrial proteases, whether these proteases account for the constitutive degradation of PINK1 in healthy mitochondria remains unclear. To explore the mechanism by which PINK1 is degraded, we performed a screen for mitochondrial proteases that influence PINK1 abundance in the fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster. We found that genetic perturbations targeting the matrix-localized protease Lon caused dramatic accumulation of processed PINK1 species in several mitochondrial compartments, including the matrix. Knockdown of Lon did not decrease mitochondrial membrane potential or trigger activation of the mitochondrial unfolded protein stress response (UPRmt), indicating that PINK1 accumulation in Lon-deficient animals is not a secondary consequence of mitochondrial depolarization or the UPRmt. Moreover, the influence of Lon on PINK1 abundance was highly specific, as Lon inactivation had little or no effect on the abundance of other mitochondrial proteins. Further studies indicated that the processed forms of PINK1 that accumulate upon Lon inactivation are capable of activating the PINK1-Parkin pathway in vivo. Our findings thus suggest that Lon plays an essential role in regulating the PINK1-Parkin pathway by promoting the degradation of PINK1 in the matrix of healthy mitochondria.
22910362	Dysfunction of PINK1, a mitochondrial Ser/Thr kinase, causes familial Parkinson's disease (PD). Recent studies have revealed that PINK1 is rapidly degraded in healthy mitochondria but accumulates on the membrane potential (DeltaPsim)-deficient mitochondria, where it recruits another familial PD gene product, Parkin, to ubiquitylate the damaged mitochondria. Despite extensive study, the mechanism underlying the homeostatic control of PINK1 remains unknown. Here we report that PINK1 is autophosphorylated following a decrease in DeltaPsim and that most disease-relevant mutations hinder this event. Mass spectrometric and mutational analyses demonstrate that PINK1 autophosphorylation occurs at Ser228 and Ser402, residues that are structurally clustered together. Importantly, Ala mutation of these sites abolishes autophosphorylation of PINK1 and inhibits Parkin recruitment onto depolarized mitochondria, whereas Asp (phosphorylation-mimic) mutation promotes mitochondrial localization of Parkin even though autophosphorylation was still compromised. We propose that autophosphorylation of Ser228 and Ser402 in PINK1 is essential for efficient mitochondrial localization of Parkin.
23509287	The accumulation of damaged mitochondria has been proposed as a key factor in aging and the pathogenesis of many common age-related diseases, including Parkinson disease (PD). Recently, in vitro studies of the PD-related proteins Parkin and PINK1 have found that these factors act in a common pathway to promote the selective autophagic degradation of damaged mitochondria (mitophagy). However, whether Parkin and PINK1 promote mitophagy under normal physiological conditions in vivo is unknown. To address this question, we used a proteomic approach in Drosophila to compare the rates of mitochondrial protein turnover in parkin mutants, PINK1 mutants, and control flies. We found that parkin null mutants showed a significant overall slowing of mitochondrial protein turnover, similar to but less severe than the slowing seen in autophagy-deficient Atg7 mutants, consistent with the model that Parkin acts upstream of Atg7 to promote mitophagy. By contrast, the turnover of many mitochondrial respiratory chain (RC) subunits showed greater impairment in parkin than Atg7 mutants, and RC turnover was also selectively impaired in PINK1 mutants. Our findings show that the PINK1-Parkin pathway promotes mitophagy in vivo and, unexpectedly, also promotes selective turnover of mitochondrial RC subunits. Failure to degrade damaged RC proteins could account for the RC deficits seen in many PD patients and may play an important role in PD pathogenesis.
18957282	PTEN-induced putative kinase 1 (PINK1) and Parkin, encoded by their respective genes associated with Parkinson's disease (PD), are linked in a common pathway involved in the protection of mitochondrial integrity and function. However, the mechanism of their interaction at the biochemical level has not been investigated yet. Using both mammalian and Drosophila systems, we here demonstrate that the PINK1 kinase activity is required for its function in mitochondria. PINK1 regulates the localization of Parkin to the mitochondria in its kinase activity-dependent manner. In detail, Parkin phosphorylation by PINK1 on its linker region promotes its mitochondrial translocation, and the RING1 domain of Parkin is critical for this occurrence. These results demonstrate the biochemical relationship between PINK1, Parkin, and the mitochondria and thereby suggest the possible mechanism of PINK-Parkin-associated PD pathogenesis.
19282869	High temperature requirement A2 (HtrA2/Omi) is a mitochondrial protease that exhibits proapoptotic and cell-protective properties and has been linked to Parkinson's disease (PD). Impaired mitochondrial function is a common trait in PD patients, and is likely to play a significant role in pathogenesis of parkinsonism, but the molecular mechanisms remain poorly understood. Genetic studies in Drosophila have provided valuable insight into the function of other PD-linked genes, in particular PINK1 and parkin, and their role in maintaining mitochondrial integrity. Recently, HtrA2 was shown to be phosphorylated in a PINK1-dependent manner, suggesting it might act in the PINK1 pathway. Here, we describe the characterization of mutations in Drosophila HtrA2, and genetic analysis of its function with PINK1 and parkin. Interestingly, we find HtrA2 appears to be dispensable for developmental or stress-induced apoptosis. In addition, we found HtrA2 mutants share some phenotypic similarities with parkin and PINK1 mutants, suggesting that it may function in maintaining mitochondrial integrity. Our genetic interaction studies, including analysis of double-mutant combinations and epistasis experiments, suggest HtrA2 acts downstream of PINK1 but in a pathway parallel to Parkin.
25716315	The failure to trigger mitophagy is implicated in the pathogenesis of familial Parkinson disease that is caused by PINK1 or Parkin mutations. According to the prevailing PINK1-Parkin signaling model, mitophagy is promoted by the mitochondrial translocation of Parkin, an essential PINK1-dependent step that occurs via a previously unknown mechanism. Here we determined that critical concentrations of NO was sufficient to induce the mitochondrial translocation of Parkin even in PINK1 deficiency, with apparent increased interaction of full-length PINK1 accumulated during mitophagy, with neuronal nitric oxide synthase (nNOS). Specifically, optimum levels of NO enabled PINK1-null dopaminergic neuronal cells to regain the mitochondrial translocation of Parkin, which appeared to be significantly suppressed by nNOS-null mutation. Moreover, nNOS-null mutation resulted in the same mitochondrial electron transport chain (ETC) enzyme deficits as PINK1-null mutation. The involvement of mitochondrial nNOS activation in mitophagy was further confirmed by the greatly increased interactions of full-length PINK1 with nNOS, accompanied by mitochondrial accumulation of phospho-nNOS (Ser(1412)) during mitophagy. Of great interest is that the L347P PINK1 mutant failed to bind to nNOS. The loss of nNOS phosphorylation and Parkin accumulation on PINK1-deficient mitochondria could be reversed in a PINK1-dependent manner. Finally, non-toxic levels of NO treatment aided in the recovery of PINK1-null dopaminergic neuronal cells from mitochondrial ETC enzyme deficits. In summary, we demonstrated the full-length PINK1-dependent recruitment of nNOS, its activation in the induction of Parkin translocation, and the feasibility of NO-based pharmacotherapy for defective mitophagy and ETC enzyme deficits in Parkinson disease.
25376463	Mutations in the mitochondrial Ser/Thr kinase PINK1 cause Parkinson's disease. One of the substrates of PINK1 is the outer mitochondrial membrane protein Miro, which regulates mitochondrial transport. In this study, we uncovered novel physiological functions of PINK1-mediated phosphorylation of Miro, using Drosophila as a model. We replaced endogenous Drosophila Miro (DMiro) with transgenically expressed wildtype, or mutant DMiro predicted to resist PINK1-mediated phosphorylation. We found that the expression of phospho-resistant DMiro in a DMiro null mutant background phenocopied a subset of phenotypes of PINK1 null. Specifically, phospho-resistant DMiro increased mitochondrial movement and synaptic growth at larval neuromuscular junctions, and decreased the number of dopaminergic neurons in adult brains. Therefore, PINK1 may inhibit synaptic growth and protect dopaminergic neurons by phosphorylating DMiro. Furthermore, muscle degeneration, swollen mitochondria and locomotor defects found in PINK1 null flies were not observed in phospho-resistant DMiro flies. Thus, our study established an in vivo platform to define functional consequences of PINK1-mediated phosphorylation of its substrates.
22724072	Missense mutations in PTEN-induced kinase 1 (PINK1) cause autosomal-recessive inherited Parkinson's disease (PD). We have exploited our recent discovery that recombinant insect PINK1 is catalytically active to test whether PINK1 directly phosphorylates 15 proteins encoded by PD-associated genes as well as proteins reported to bind PINK1. We have discovered that insect PINK1 efficiently phosphorylates only one of these proteins, namely the E3 ligase Parkin. We have mapped the phosphorylation site to a highly conserved residue within the Ubl domain of Parkin at Ser(65). We show that human PINK1 is specifically activated by mitochondrial membrane potential (Deltapsim) depolarization, enabling it to phosphorylate Parkin at Ser(65). We further show that phosphorylation of Parkin at Ser(65) leads to marked activation of its E3 ligase activity that is prevented by mutation of Ser(65) or inactivation of PINK1. We provide evidence that once activated, PINK1 autophosphorylates at several residues, including Thr(257), which is accompanied by an electrophoretic mobility band-shift. These results provide the first evidence that PINK1 is activated following Deltapsim depolarization and suggest that PINK1 directly phosphorylates and activates Parkin. Our findings indicate that monitoring phosphorylation of Parkin at Ser(65) and/or PINK1 at Thr(257) represent the first biomarkers for examining activity of the PINK1-Parkin signalling pathway in vivo. Our findings also suggest that small molecule activators of Parkin that mimic the effect of PINK1 phosphorylation may confer therapeutic benefit for PD.
23867819	Loss-of-function mutation of the PTEN-induced kinase 1 (PINK1) gene is a common cause of early-onset Parkinson's disease (PD). Glutathione S-transferase omega (GSTO) is a phase II detoxification enzyme that conjugates targets to glutathione, and has recently been implicated in parkin-associated PD. In this study, we found Drosophila GstO2 to be a novel genetic suppressor of the PINK1 loss-of-function mutant. We show that GstO2A expression is reduced in PINK1 mutants. Moreover, the upregulation of GstO2A restores muscle degeneration and dopaminergic neuron loss in PINK1 mutants. Given the previous data of a reduced expression of GstO2A and decreased glutathionylation of ATP synthase beta subunit in parkin or PINK1 mutants, these results suggest that the function of GstO2 is regulated by the PINK1/parkin pathway and that GstO2 also has a protective role in PINK1-associated PD.
27054334	Calcium has an important role in regulating numerous cellular activities. However, extremely high levels of intracellular calcium can lead to neurotoxicity, a process commonly associated with degenerative diseases. Despite the clear role of calcium cytotoxicity in mediating neuronal cell death in this context, the pathological mechanisms remain controversial. We used a well-established Drosophila model of retinal degeneration, which involves the constitutively active TRP(P365) channels, to study calcium-induced neurotoxicity. We found that the disruption of mitochondrial function was associated with the degenerative process. Further, increasing autophagy flux prevented cell death in Trp(P365) mutant flies, and this depended on the PINK1/Parkin pathway. In addition, the retinal degeneration process was also suppressed by the coexpression of PINK1 and Parkin. Our results provide genetic evidence that mitochondrial dysfunction has a key role in the pathology of cellular calcium neurotoxicity. In addition, the results demonstrated that maintaining mitochondrial homeostasis via PINK1/Parkin-dependent mitochondrial quality control can potentially alleviate cell death in a wide range of neurodegenerative diseases.
25145627	Genetic mutations in parkin or pink1 are the most common causes of familial Parkinson's disease. PINK1 and Parkin are components of a mitochondrial quality control pathway that degrades dysfunctional mitochondria via autophagy. Using a candidate gene approach, we discovered that overexpression of uncoupling protein 4A (ucp4A) suppresses a range of pink1 mutant phenotypes, including male sterility, locomotor defects, and muscle degeneration that result from abnormal mitochondrial morphology and function. Furthermore, UCP4A overexpression in pink1 mutants rescued mitochondria-specific phenotypes associated with mitochondrial membrane potential, production of reactive oxygen species, resistance to oxidative stress, efficiency of the electron transport chain, and mitochondrial morphology. Consistent with its role in protecting mitochondria, UCP4A rescued mitochondrial phenotypes of parkin mutant flies, as well. Finally, the genetic deletion of ucp4A resulted in increased sensitivity to oxidative stress, a phenotype that was enhanced by the loss of PINK1. Taken together, these results indicate that UCP4A prevents mitochondrial dysfunction and that modulation of UCP activity protects cells in a situation relevant for human Parkinson's disease.
19546216	Loss-of-function mutations in the parkin gene (PARK2) and PINK1 gene (PARK6) are associated with autosomal recessive parkinsonism. PINK1 deficiency was recently linked to mitochondrial pathology in human cells and Drosophila melanogaster, which can be rescued by parkin, suggesting that both genes play a role in maintaining mitochondrial integrity. Here we demonstrate that an acute down-regulation of parkin in human SH-SY5Y cells severely affects mitochondrial morphology and function, a phenotype comparable with that induced by PINK1 deficiency. Alterations in both mitochondrial morphology and ATP production caused by either parkin or PINK1 loss of function could be rescued by the mitochondrial fusion proteins Mfn2 and OPA1 or by a dominant negative mutant of the fission protein Drp1. Both parkin and PINK1 were able to suppress mitochondrial fragmentation induced by Drp1. Moreover, in Drp1-deficient cells the parkin/PINK1 knockdown phenotype did not occur, indicating that mitochondrial alterations observed in parkin- or PINK1-deficient cells are associated with an increase in mitochondrial fission. Notably, mitochondrial fragmentation is an early phenomenon upon PINK1/parkin silencing that also occurs in primary mouse neurons and Drosophila S2 cells. We propose that the discrepant findings in adult flies can be explained by the time of phenotype analysis and suggest that in mammals different strategies may have evolved to cope with dysfunctional mitochondria.
23620051	Senescent and damaged mitochondria undergo selective mitophagic elimination through mechanisms requiring two Parkinson's disease factors, the mitochondrial kinase PINK1 (PTEN-induced putative kinase protein 1; PTEN is phosphatase and tensin homolog) and the cytosolic ubiquitin ligase Parkin. The nature of the PINK-Parkin interaction and the identity of key factors directing Parkin to damaged mitochondria are unknown. We show that the mitochondrial outer membrane guanosine triphosphatase mitofusin (Mfn) 2 mediates Parkin recruitment to damaged mitochondria. Parkin bound to Mfn2 in a PINK1-dependent manner; PINK1 phosphorylated Mfn2 and promoted its Parkin-mediated ubiqitination. Ablation of Mfn2 in mouse cardiac myocytes prevented depolarization-induced translocation of Parkin to the mitochondria and suppressed mitophagy. Accumulation of morphologically and functionally abnormal mitochondria induced respiratory dysfunction in Mfn2-deficient mouse embryonic fibroblasts and cardiomyocytes and in Parkin-deficient Drosophila heart tubes, causing dilated cardiomyopathy. Thus, Mfn2 functions as a mitochondrial receptor for Parkin and is required for quality control of cardiac mitochondria.
21613270	PTEN-induced putative kinase 1 (PINK1) and Parkin act in a common pathway to regulate mitochondrial dynamics, the involvement of which in the pathogenesis of Parkinson's disease (PD) is increasingly being appreciated. However, how the PINK1/Parkin pathway influences mitochondrial function is not well understood, and the exact role of this pathway in controlling mitochondrial dynamics remains controversial. Here we used mammalian primary neurons to examine the function of the PINK1/Parkin pathway in regulating mitochondrial dynamics and function. In rat hippocampal neurons, PINK1 or Parkin overexpression resulted in increased mitochondrial number, smaller mitochondrial size and reduced mitochondrial occupancy of neuronal processes, suggesting that the balance of mitochondrial fission/fusion dynamics is tipped toward more fission. Conversely, inactivation of PINK1 resulted in elongated mitochondria, indicating that the balance of mitochondrial fission/fusion dynamics is tipped toward more fusion. Furthermore, overexpression of the fission protein Drp1 (dynamin-related protein 1) or knocking down of the fusion protein OPA1 (optical atrophy 1) suppressed PINK1 RNAi-induced mitochondrial morphological defect, and overexpression of PINK1 or Parkin suppressed the elongated mitochondria phenotype caused by Drp1 RNAi. Functionally, PINK1 knockdown and overexpression had opposite effects on dendritic spine formation and neuronal vulnerability to excitotoxicity. Finally, we found that PINK1/Parkin similarly influenced mitochondrial dynamics in rat midbrain dopaminergic neurons. These results, together with previous findings in Drosophila dopaminergic neurons, indicate that the PINK1/Parkin pathway plays conserved roles in regulating neuronal mitochondrial dynamics and function.
26116755	Mutations in the mitochondrial protein kinase PINK1 are associated with autosomal recessive Parkinson disease (PD). We and other groups have reported that PINK1 activates Parkin E3 ligase activity both directly via phosphorylation of Parkin serine 65 (Ser(65))--which lies within its ubiquitin-like domain (Ubl)--and indirectly through phosphorylation of ubiquitin at Ser(65). How Ser(65)-phosphorylated ubiquitin (ubiquitin(Phospho-Ser65)) contributes to Parkin activation is currently unknown. Here, we demonstrate that ubiquitin(Phospho-Ser65) binding to Parkin dramatically increases the rate and stoichiometry of Parkin phosphorylation at Ser(65) by PINK1 in vitro. Analysis of the Parkin structure, corroborated by site-directed mutagenesis, shows that the conserved His302 and Lys151 residues play a critical role in binding of ubiquitin(Phospho-Ser65), thereby promoting Parkin Ser(65) phosphorylation and activation of its E3 ligase activity in vitro. Mutation of His302 markedly inhibits Parkin Ser(65) phosphorylation at the mitochondria, which is associated with a marked reduction in its E3 ligase activity following mitochondrial depolarisation. We show that the binding of ubiquitin(Phospho-Ser65) to Parkin disrupts the interaction between the Ubl domain and C-terminal region, thereby increasing the accessibility of Parkin Ser(65). Finally, purified Parkin maximally phosphorylated at Ser(65) in vitro cannot be further activated by the addition of ubiquitin(Phospho-Ser65). Our results thus suggest that a major role of ubiquitin(Phospho-Ser65) is to promote PINK1-mediated phosphorylation of Parkin at Ser(65), leading to maximal activation of Parkin E3 ligase activity. His302 and Lys151 are likely to line a phospho-Ser(65)-binding pocket on the surface of Parkin that is critical for the ubiquitin(Phospho-Ser65) interaction. This study provides new mechanistic insights into Parkin activation by ubiquitin(Phospho-Ser65), which could aid in the development of Parkin activators that mimic the effect of ubiquitin(Phospho-Ser65).
27153535	A mitochondrial kinase, PTEN-induced putative kinase 1 (PINK1), selectively recruits the ubiquitin ligase Parkin to damaged mitochondria, which modifies mitochondria by polyubiquitination, leading to mitochondrial autophagy. Here, we report that treatment with an adenylate cyclase agonist or expression of protein kinase A (PKA) impairs Parkin recruitment to damaged mitochondria and decreases PINK1 protein levels. We identified a mitochondrial membrane protein, MIC60 (also known as mitofilin), as a PKA substrate. Mutational and mass spectrometric analyses revealed that the Ser528 residue of MIC60 undergoes PKA-dependent phosphorylation. MIC60 transiently interacts with PINK1, and MIC60 downregulation leads to a reduction in PINK1 and mislocalization of Parkin. Phosphorylation-mimic mutants of MIC60 fail to restore the defect in Parkin recruitment in MIC60-knocked down cells, whereas a phosphorylation-deficient MIC60 mutant facilitates the mitochondrial localization of Parkin. Our findings indicate that PKA-mediated phosphorylation of MIC60 negatively regulates mitochondrial clearance that is initiated by PINK1 and Parkin.
24647965	Mutations in PINK1 and Parkin are associated with early-onset Parkinson's disease. We recently discovered that PINK1 phosphorylates Parkin at serine65 (Ser(65)) within its Ubl domain, leading to its activation in a substrate-free activity assay. We now demonstrate the critical requirement of Ser(65) phosphorylation for substrate ubiquitylation through elaboration of a novel in vitro E3 ligase activity assay using full-length untagged Parkin and its putative substrate, the mitochondrial GTPase Miro1. We observe that Parkin efficiently ubiquitylates Miro1 at highly conserved lysine residues, 153, 230, 235, 330 and 572, upon phosphorylation by PINK1. We have further established an E2-ubiquitin discharge assay to assess Parkin activity and observe robust discharge of ubiquitin-loaded UbcH7 E2 ligase upon phosphorylation of Parkin at Ser(65) by wild-type, but not kinase-inactive PINK1 or a Parkin Ser65Ala mutant, suggesting a possible mechanism of how Ser(65) phosphorylation may activate Parkin E3 ligase activity. For the first time, to the best of our knowledge, we report the effect of Parkin disease-associated mutations in substrate-based assays using full-length untagged recombinant Parkin. Our mutation analysis indicates an essential role for the catalytic cysteine Cys431 and reveals fundamental new knowledge on how mutations may confer pathogenicity via disruption of Miro1 ubiquitylation, free ubiquitin chain formation or by impacting Parkin's ability to discharge ubiquitin from a loaded E2. This study provides further evidence that phosphorylation of Parkin at Ser(65) is critical for its activation. It also provides evidence that Miro1 is a direct Parkin substrate. The assays and reagents developed in this study will be important to uncover new insights into Parkin biology as well as aid in the development of screens to identify small molecule Parkin activators for the treatment of Parkinson's disease.
25375667	Loss-of-function mutations in PINK1 or PARKIN are the most common causes of autosomal recessive Parkinson's disease. Both gene products, the Ser/Thr kinase PINK1 and the E3 Ubiquitin ligase Parkin, functionally cooperate in a mitochondrial quality control pathway. Upon stress, PINK1 activates Parkin and enables its translocation to and ubiquitination of damaged mitochondria to facilitate their clearance from the cell. Though PINK1-dependent phosphorylation of Ser65 is an important initial step, the molecular mechanisms underlying the activation of Parkin's enzymatic functions remain unclear. Using molecular modeling, we generated a complete structural model of human Parkin at all atom resolution. At steady state, the Ub ligase is maintained inactive in a closed, auto-inhibited conformation that results from intra-molecular interactions. Evidently, Parkin has to undergo major structural rearrangements in order to unleash its catalytic activity. As a spark, we have modeled PINK1-dependent Ser65 phosphorylation in silico and provide the first molecular dynamics simulation of Parkin conformations along a sequential unfolding pathway that could release its intertwined domains and enable its catalytic activity. We combined free (unbiased) molecular dynamics simulation, Monte Carlo algorithms, and minimal-biasing methods with cell-based high content imaging and biochemical assays. Phosphorylation of Ser65 results in widening of a newly defined cleft and dissociation of the regulatory N-terminal UBL domain. This motion propagates through further opening conformations that allow binding of an Ub-loaded E2 co-enzyme. Subsequent spatial reorientation of the catalytic centers of both enzymes might facilitate the transfer of the Ub moiety to charge Parkin. Our structure-function study provides the basis to elucidate regulatory mechanisms and activity of the neuroprotective Parkin. This may open up new avenues for the development of small molecule Parkin activators through targeted drug design.
23754282	PINK1 and PARKIN are causal genes for autosomal recessive familial Parkinsonism. PINK1 is a mitochondrial Ser/Thr kinase, whereas Parkin functions as an E3 ubiquitin ligase. Under steady-state conditions, Parkin localizes to the cytoplasm where its E3 activity is repressed. A decrease in mitochondrial membrane potential triggers Parkin E3 activity and recruits it to depolarized mitochondria for ubiquitylation of mitochondrial substrates. The molecular basis for how the E3 activity of Parkin is re-established by mitochondrial damage has yet to be determined. Here we provide in vitro biochemical evidence for ubiquitin-thioester formation on Cys-431 of recombinant Parkin. We also report that Parkin forms a ubiquitin-ester following a decrease in mitochondrial membrane potential in cells, and that this event is essential for substrate ubiquitylation. Importantly, the Parkin RING2 domain acts as a transthiolation or acyl-transferring domain rather than an E2-recruiting domain. Furthermore, formation of the ubiquitin-ester depends on PINK1 phosphorylation of Parkin Ser-65. A phosphorylation-deficient mutation completely inhibited formation of the Parkin ubiquitin-ester intermediate, whereas phosphorylation mimics, such as Ser to Glu substitution, enabled partial formation of the intermediate irrespective of Ser-65 phosphorylation. We propose that PINK1-dependent phosphorylation of Parkin leads to the ubiquitin-ester transfer reaction of the RING2 domain, and that this is an essential step in Parkin activation.
25609704	Dysfunction of PTEN-induced putative kinase 1 (PINK1), a Ser/Thr kinase with an N-terminal mitochondrial-targeting sequence (MTS), causes familial recessive parkinsonism. Reduction of the mitochondrial membrane potential limits MTS-mediated matrix import and promotes PINK1 accumulation on the outer mitochondrial membrane (OMM) of depolarized mitochondria. PINK1 then undergoes autophosphorylation and phosphorylates ubiquitin and Parkin, a cytosolic ubiquitin ligase, for clearance of damaged mitochondria. The molecular basis for PINK1 localization on the OMM of depolarized mitochondria rather than release to the cytosol is poorly understood. Here, we disentangle the PINK1 localization mechanism using deletion mutants and a newly established constitutively active PINK1 mutant. Disruption of the MTS through N-terminal insertion of aspartic acid residues results in OMM localization of PINK1 in energized mitochondria. Unexpectedly, the MTS and putative transmembrane domain (TMD) are dispensable for OMM localization, whereas mitochondrial translocase Tom40 (also known as TOMM40) and an alternative mitochondrial localization signal that resides between the MTS and TMD are required. PINK1 utilizes a mitochondrial localization mechanism that is distinct from that of conventional MTS proteins and that presumably functions in conjunction with the Tom complex in OMM localization when the conventional N-terminal MTS is inhibited.
24898855	Parkinson's disease (PD) genes PINK1 and parkin act in a common pathway that regulates mitochondrial integrity and quality. Identifying new suppressors of the pathway is important for finding new therapeutic strategies. In this study, we show that MUL1 suppresses PINK1 or parkin mutant phenotypes in Drosophila. The suppression is achieved through the ubiquitin-dependent degradation of Mitofusin, which itself causes PINK1/parkin mutant-like toxicity when overexpressed. We further show that removing MUL1 in PINK1 or parkin loss-of-function mutant aggravates phenotypes caused by loss of either gene alone, leading to lethality in flies and degeneration in mouse cortical neurons. Together, these observations show that MUL1 acts in parallel to the PINK1/parkin pathway on a shared target mitofusin to maintain mitochondrial integrity. The MUL1 pathway compensates for loss of PINK1/parkin in both Drosophila and mammals and is a promising therapeutic target for PD.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.01958.001.
27302064	Phosphatase and tensin homolog-induced putative kinase 1 (PINK1), a Ser/Thr kinase, and PARKIN, a ubiquitin ligase, are causal genes for autosomal recessive early-onset parkinsonism. Multiple lines of evidence indicate that PINK1 and PARKIN cooperatively control the quality of the mitochondrial population via selective degradation of damaged mitochondria by autophagy. Here, we report that PINK1 and PARKIN induce cell death with a 12-h delay after mitochondrial depolarization, which differs from the time profile of selective autophagy of mitochondria. This type of cell death exhibited definite morphologic features such as plasma membrane rupture, was insensitive to a pan-caspase inhibitor, and did not involve mitochondrial permeability transition. Expression of a constitutively active form of PINK1 caused cell death in the presence of a pan-caspase inhibitor, irrespective of the mitochondrial membrane potential. PINK1-mediated cell death depended on the activities of PARKIN and proteasomes, but it was not affected by disruption of the genes required for autophagy. Furthermore, fluorescence and electron microscopic analyses revealed that mitochondria were still retained in the dead cells, indicating that PINK1-mediated cell death is not caused by mitochondrial loss. Our findings suggest that PINK1 and PARKIN play critical roles in selective cell death in which damaged mitochondria are retained, independent of mitochondrial autophagy.
27528605	Mutations in PINK1 (PTEN-induced putative kinase 1) cause early onset familial Parkinson's disease (PD). PINK1 accumulates on the outer membrane of damaged mitochondria followed by recruiting parkin to promote mitophagy. Here, we demonstrate that BCL2/adenovirus E1B 19-kDa interacting protein 3 (BNIP3), a mitochondrial BH3-only protein, interacts with PINK1 to promote the accumulation of full-length PINK1 on the outer membrane of mitochondria, which facilitates parkin recruitment and PINK1/parkin-mediated mitophagy. Inactivation of BNIP3 in mammalian cells promotes PINK1 proteolytic processing and suppresses PINK1/parkin-mediated mitophagy. Hypoxia-induced BNIP3 expression results in increased expression of full-length PINK1 and mitophagy. Consistently, expression of BNIP3 in Drosophila suppresses muscle degeneration and the mitochondrial abnormality caused by PINK1 inactivation. Together, the results suggest that BNIP3 plays a vital role in regulating PINK1 mitochondrial outer membrane localization, the proteolytic process of PINK1 and PINK1/parkin-mediated mitophagy under physiological conditions. Functional up-regulation of BNIP3 may represent a novel therapeutic strategy to suppress the progression of PD.
20798600	Mitochondrial dysfunction is an early sign of many neurodegenerative diseases. Very recently, two Parkinson disease (PD) associated genes, PINK1 and Parkin, were shown to mediate the degradation of damaged mitochondria via selective autophagy (mitophagy). PINK1 kinase activity is needed for prompt and efficient Parkin recruitment to impaired mitochondria. PD-associated Parkin mutations interfere with the process of mitophagy at distinct steps. Here we show that whole mitochondria are turned over via macroautophagy. Moreover, disease-associated PINK1 mutations also compromise the selective degradation of depolarized mitochondria. This may be due to the decreased physical binding activity of PD-linked PINK1 mutations to Parkin. Thus, PINK1 mutations abrogate autophagy of impaired mitochondria upstream of Parkin. In addition to compromised PINK1 kinase activity, reduced binding of PINK1 to Parkin leads to failure in Parkin mitochondrial translocation, resulting in the accumulation of damaged mitochondria, which may contribute to disease pathogenesis.
22280891	Mutations in the mitochondrial kinase PINK1 and the cytosolic E3 ligase Parkin can cause Parkinson's disease. Damaged mitochondria accumulate PINK1 on the outer membrane where, dependent on kinase activity, it recruits and activates Parkin to induce mitophagy, potentially maintaining organelle fidelity. How PINK1 recruits Parkin is unknown. We show that endogenous PINK1 forms a 700 kDa complex with the translocase of the outer membrane (TOM) selectively on depolarized mitochondria whereas PINK1 ectopically targeted to the outer membrane retains association with TOM on polarized mitochondria. Inducibly targeting PINK1 to peroxisomes or lysosomes, which lack a TOM complex, recruits Parkin and activates ubiquitin ligase activity on the respective organelles. Once there, Parkin induces organelle selective autophagy of peroxisomes but not lysosomes. We propose that the association of PINK1 with the TOM complex allows rapid reimport of PINK1 to rescue repolarized mitochondria from mitophagy, and discount mitochondrial-specific factors for Parkin translocation and activation.
25217637	Parkinson disease (PD) is a complex neurodegenerative disease characterized by the loss of dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra. Multiple genes have been associated with PD, including Parkin and PINK1. Recent studies have established that the Parkin and PINK1 proteins function in a common mitochondrial quality control pathway, whereby disruption of the mitochondrial membrane potential leads to PINK1 stabilization at the mitochondrial outer surface. PINK1 accumulation leads to Parkin recruitment from the cytosol, which in turn promotes the degradation of the damaged mitochondria by autophagy (mitophagy). Most studies characterizing PINK1/Parkin mitophagy have relied on high concentrations of chemical uncouplers to trigger mitochondrial depolarization, a stimulus that has been difficult to adapt to neuronal systems and one unlikely to faithfully model the mitochondrial damage that occurs in PD. Here, we report that the short mitochondrial isoform of ARF (smARF), previously identified as an alternate translation product of the tumor suppressor p19ARF, depolarizes mitochondria and promotes mitophagy in a Parkin/PINK1-dependent manner, both in cell lines and in neurons. The work positions smARF upstream of PINK1 and Parkin and demonstrates that mitophagy can be triggered by intrinsic signaling cascades.
24149440	Loss-of-function mutations in PARK2/PARKIN and PINK1 cause early-onset autosomal recessive Parkinson disease (PD). The cytosolic E3 ubiquitin-protein ligase PARK2 cooperates with the mitochondrial kinase PINK1 to maintain mitochondrial quality. A loss of mitochondrial transmembrane potential (DeltaPsi) leads to the PINK1-dependent recruitment of PARK2 to the outer mitochondrial membrane (OMM), followed by the ubiquitination and proteasome-dependent degradation of OMM proteins, and by the autophagy-dependent clearance of mitochondrial remnants. We showed here that blockade of mitochondrial protein import triggers the recruitment of PARK2, by PINK1, to the TOMM machinery. PD-causing PARK2 mutations weakened or disrupted the molecular interaction between PARK2 and specific TOMM subunits: the surface receptor, TOMM70A, and the channel protein, TOMM40. The downregulation of TOMM40 or its associated core subunit, TOMM22, was sufficient to trigger OMM protein clearance in the absence of PINK1 or PARK2. However, PARK2 was required to promote the degradation of whole organelles by autophagy. Furthermore, the overproduction of TOMM22 or TOMM40 reversed mitochondrial clearance promoted by PINK1 and PARK2 after DeltaPsi loss. These results indicated that the TOMM machinery is a key molecular switch in the mitochondrial clearance program controlled by the PINK1-PARK2 pathway. Loss of functional coupling between mitochondrial protein import and the neuroprotective degradation of dysfunctional mitochondria may therefore be a primary pathogenic mechanism in autosomal recessive PD.
26266977	Protein aggregates and damaged organelles are tagged with ubiquitin chains to trigger selective autophagy. To initiate mitophagy, the ubiquitin kinase PINK1 phosphorylates ubiquitin to activate the ubiquitin ligase parkin, which builds ubiquitin chains on mitochondrial outer membrane proteins, where they act to recruit autophagy receptors. Using genome editing to knockout five autophagy receptors in HeLa cells, here we show that two receptors previously linked to xenophagy, NDP52 and optineurin, are the primary receptors for PINK1- and parkin-mediated mitophagy. PINK1 recruits NDP52 and optineurin, but not p62, to mitochondria to activate mitophagy directly, independently of parkin. Once recruited to mitochondria, NDP52 and optineurin recruit the autophagy factors ULK1, DFCP1 and WIPI1 to focal spots proximal to mitochondria, revealing a function for these autophagy receptors upstream of LC3. This supports a new model in which PINK1-generated phospho-ubiquitin serves as the autophagy signal on mitochondria, and parkin then acts to amplify this signal. This work also suggests direct and broader roles for ubiquitin phosphorylation in other autophagy pathways.
28556983	Mitochondrial Protein Kinase A (PKA) and PTEN-induced kinase 1 (PINK1), which is linked to Parkinson's disease, are two neuroprotective serine/threonine kinases that regulate dendrite remodeling and mitochondrial function. We have previously shown that PINK1 regulates dendrite morphology by enhancing PKA activity. Here, we show the molecular mechanisms by which PINK1 and PKA in the mitochondrion interact to regulate dendrite remodeling, mitochondrial morphology, content, and trafficking in dendrites. PINK1-deficient cortical neurons exhibit impaired mitochondrial trafficking, reduced mitochondrial content, fragmented mitochondria, and a reduction in dendrite outgrowth compared to wild-type neurons. Transient expression of wild-type, but not a PKA-binding-deficient mutant of the PKA-mitochondrial scaffold dual-specificity A Kinase Anchoring Protein 1 (D-AKAP1), restores mitochondrial trafficking, morphology, and content in dendrites of PINK1-deficient cortical neurons suggesting that recruiting PKA to the mitochondrion reverses mitochondrial pathology in dendrites induced by loss of PINK1. Mechanistically, full-length and cleaved forms of PINK1 increase the binding of the regulatory subunit beta of PKA (PKA/RIIbeta) to D-AKAP1 to enhance the autocatalytic-mediated phosphorylation of PKA/RIIbeta and PKA activity. D-AKAP1/PKA governs mitochondrial trafficking in dendrites via the Miro-2/TRAK2 complex and by increasing the phosphorylation of Miro-2. Our study identifies a new role of D-AKAP1 in regulating mitochondrial trafficking through Miro-2, and supports a model in which PINK1 and mitochondrial PKA participate in a similar neuroprotective signaling pathway to maintain dendrite connectivity.
20871098	Mitochondrial dysfunction and perturbed degradation of proteins have been implicated in Parkinson's disease (PD) pathogenesis. Mutations in the Parkin and PINK1 genes are a cause of familial PD. PINK1 is a putative kinase associated with mitochondria, and loss of PINK1 expression leads to mitochondrial dysfunction, which increases with time. Parkin is suggested to be downstream of PINK1 and also mediates the removal of damaged mitochondria by macroautophagy (mitophagy). We investigated whether mitochondrial dysfunction in dopaminergic SH-SY5Y cells following decreased PINK1 expression by RNAi may in part be due to the inhibition of mitophagy. Reduced flux through the macroautophagy pathway was found to be coincident with the inhibition of ATP synthesis following 12 days of PINK1 silencing. Overexpression of parkin in these cells restored both autophagic flux and ATP synthesis. Overexpression and RNAi studies also indicated that PINK1 and parkin were required for mitophagy following CCCP-induced mitochondrial damage. The ubiquitination of several mitochondrial proteins, including mitofusin 1 and mitofusin 2, were detected within 3 h of CCCP treatment. These post-translational modifications were reduced following the silencing of parkin or PINK1. The ubiquitination of mitochondrial proteins appears to identify mitochondria for degradation and facilitate mitophagy. PINK1 and parkin are thus required for the removal of damaged mitochondria in dopaminergic cells, and inhibition of this pathway may lead to the accumulation of defective mitochondria which may contribute to PD pathogenesis.
27091447	Mitochondrial fission is essential for the degradation of damaged mitochondria. It is currently unknown how the dynamin-related protein 1 (DRP1)-associated fission machinery is selectively targeted to segregate damaged mitochondria. We show that PTEN-induced putative kinase (PINK1) serves as a pro-fission signal, independently of Parkin. Normally, the scaffold protein AKAP1 recruits protein kinase A (PKA) to the outer mitochondrial membrane to phospho-inhibit DRP1. We reveal that after damage, PINK1 triggers PKA displacement from A-kinase anchoring protein 1. By ejecting PKA, PINK1 ensures the requisite fission of damaged mitochondria for organelle degradation. We propose that PINK1 functions as a master mitophagy regulator by activating Parkin and DRP1 in response to damage. We confirm that PINK1 mutations causing Parkinson disease interfere with the orchestration of selective fission and mitophagy by PINK1.
19880420	Mutations in PTEN-induced putative kinase 1 (PINK1) or parkin cause autosomal recessive forms of Parkinson disease (PD), but how these mutations trigger neurodegeneration is poorly understood and the exact functional relationship between PINK1 and parkin remains unclear. Here, we report that PINK1 regulates the E3 ubiquitin-protein ligase function of parkin through direct phosphorylation. We find that phosphorylation of parkin by PINK1 activates parkin E3 ligase function for catalyzing K63-linked polyubiquitination and enhances parkin-mediated ubiquitin signaling through the IkappaB kinase/nuclear factor kappaB (NF-kappaB) pathway. Furthermore, the ability of PINK1 to promote parkin phosphorylation and activate parkin-mediated ubiquitin signaling is impaired by PD-linked pathogenic PINK1 mutations. Our findings support a direct link between PINK1-mediated phosphorylation and parkin-mediated ubiquitin signaling and implicate the deregulation of the PINK1/parkin/NF-kappaB neuroprotective signaling pathway in the pathogenesis of PD.
20098416	Parkinson's disease is the most common neurodegenerative movement disorder. Mutations in PINK1 and PARKIN are the most frequent causes of recessive Parkinson's disease. However, their molecular contribution to pathogenesis remains unclear. Here, we reveal important mechanistic steps of a PINK1/Parkin-directed pathway linking mitochondrial damage, ubiquitylation and autophagy in non-neuronal and neuronal cells. PINK1 kinase activity and its mitochondrial localization sequence are prerequisites to induce translocation of the E3 ligase Parkin to depolarized mitochondria. Subsequently, Parkin mediates the formation of two distinct poly-ubiquitin chains, linked through Lys 63 and Lys 27. In addition, the autophagic adaptor p62/SQSTM1 is recruited to mitochondrial clusters and is essential for the clearance of mitochondria. Strikingly, we identified VDAC1 (voltage-dependent anion channel 1) as a target for Parkin-mediated Lys 27 poly-ubiquitylation and mitophagy. Moreover, pathogenic Parkin mutations interfere with distinct steps of mitochondrial translocation, ubiquitylation and/or final clearance through mitophagy. Thus, our data provide functional links between PINK1, Parkin and the selective autophagy of mitochondria, which is implicated in the pathogenesis of Parkinson's disease.
27334109	PTEN-induced putative kinase 1 (PINK1) and parkin are mutated in familial forms of Parkinson's disease and are important in promoting the mitophagy of damaged mitochondria. In this study, we showed that synphilin-1 interacted with PINK1 and was recruited to the mitochondria. Once in the mitochondria, it promoted PINK1-dependent mitophagy, as revealed by Atg5 knockdown experiments and the recruitment of LC3 and Lamp1 to the mitochondria. PINK1-synphilin-1 mitophagy did not depend on PINK1-mediated phosphorylation of synphilin-1 and occurred in the absence of parkin. Synphilin-1 itself caused depolarization of the mitochondria and increased the amount of uncleaved PINK1 at the organelle. Furthermore, synphilin-1 recruited seven in absentia homolog (SIAH)-1 to the mitochondria where it promoted mitochondrial protein ubiquitination and subsequent mitophagy. Mitophagy via this pathway was impaired by synphilin-1 knockdown or by the use of a synphilin-1 mutant that is unable to recruit SIAH-1 to the mitochondria. Likewise, knockdown of SIAH-1 or the use of a catalytically inactive SIAH-1 mutant abrogated mitophagy. PINK1 disease mutants failed to recruit synphilin-1 and did not activate mitophagy, indicating that PINK1-synphilin-1-SIAH-1 represents a new parkin-independent mitophagy pathway. Drugs that activate this pathway will provide a novel strategy to promote the clearance of damaged mitochondria in Parkinson's disease.
20153330	Mutations in PTEN-induced putative kinase 1 (PINK1) cause recessive form of Parkinson's disease (PD). PINK1 acts upstream of parkin, regulating mitochondrial integrity and functions. Here, we show that PINK1 in combination with parkin results in the perinuclear mitochondrial aggregation followed by their elimination. This elimination is reduced in cells expressing PINK1 mutants with wild-type parkin. Although wild-type PINK1 localizes in aggregated mitochondria, PINK1 mutants localization remains diffuse and mitochondrial elimination is not observed. This phenomenon is not observed in autophagy-deficient cells. These results suggest that mitophagy controlled by the PINK1/parkin pathway might be associated with PD pathogenesis.
26560306	AIMS: PTEN-putative kinase 1 (PINK1)-Parkin-mediated mitophagy is crucial for the clearance of damaged mitochondria. However, the mechanisms underlying PINK1-Parkin-mediated mitophagy are not fully understood. The goal of this study is to identify new regulators and to elucidate the regulatory mechanisms of mitophagy. RESULTS: Quantitative mitochondrial proteomic analysis revealed that 63 proteins showed increased levels and 36 proteins showed decreased levels in cells subjected to carbonyl cyanide m-chlorophenyl hydrazone (CCCP) treatment. Peroxiredoxin 6 (PRDX6 or Prx6), a unique member of the ubiquitous PRDX family, was recruited to depolarized mitochondria. Reactive oxygen species (ROS) generated by CCCP promoted PRDX6 accumulation and PINK1 stabilization in damaged mitochondria and induced mitophagy. In addition, depletion of PRDX6 resulted in the stabilization of PINK1, accumulation of autophagic marker, p62, translocation of Parkin to mitochondria, and lipidation of microtubule-associated protein 1 light chain 3. Furthermore, these events were blocked upon supplementation with antioxidant N-acetyl-l-cysteine or depletion of PINK1. INNOVATION: This is the first study to demonstrate that PRDX6 is the only member of the PRDX family that relocates to damaged mitochondria, where it plays a crucial role in the initial stage of mitophagy by controlling ROS homeostasis. CONCLUSION: ROS induce the recruitment of PRDX6 to mitochondria, where PRDX6 controls ROS homeostasis in the initial step of PINK1-Parkin-mediated mitophagy. Our study provides new insight into the initial regulatory mechanisms of mitophagy and reveals the protective role of PRDX6 in the clearance of damaged mitochondria.
24446486	Mitochondrial dysfunction has long been associated with Parkinson's disease (PD). Parkin and PINK1, two genes associated with familial PD, have been implicated in the degradation of depolarized mitochondria via autophagy (mitophagy). Here, we describe the involvement of parkin and PINK1 in a vesicular pathway regulating mitochondrial quality control. This pathway is distinct from canonical mitophagy and is triggered by the generation of oxidative stress from within mitochondria. Wild-type but not PD-linked mutant parkin supports the biogenesis of a population of mitochondria-derived vesicles (MDVs), which bud off mitochondria and contain a specific repertoire of cargo proteins. These MDVs require PINK1 expression and ultimately target to lysosomes for degradation. We hypothesize that loss of this parkin- and PINK1-dependent trafficking mechanism impairs the ability of mitochondria to selectively degrade oxidized and damaged proteins leading, over time, to the mitochondrial dysfunction noted in PD.
23885119	Mutations in PTEN-induced putative kinase 1 (PINK1) or parkin cause autosomal recessive forms of Parkinson's disease. Recent work suggests that loss of mitochondrial membrane potential stabilizes PINK1 and that accumulated PINK1 recruits parkin from the cytoplasm to mitochondria for elimination of depolarized mitochondria, which is known as mitophagy. In this study, we find that PINK1 forms a complex with sterile alpha and TIR motif containing 1 (SARM1) and tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated factor 6 (TRAF6), which is important for import of PINK1 in the outer membrane and stabilization of PINK1 on depolarized mitochondria. SARM1, which is known to be an adaptor protein for Toll-like receptor, binds to PINK1 and promotes TRAF6-mediated lysine 63 chain ubiquitination of PINK1 at lysine 433. Down-regulation of SARM1 and TRAF6 abrogates accumulation of PINK1, followed by recruitment of parkin to damaged mitochondria. Some pathogenic mutations of PINK1 reduce the complex formation and ubiquitination. These results indicate that association of PINK1 with SARM1 and TRAF6 is an important step for mitophagy.
20164189	Mutations in the mitochondrial encoded protein PTEN-induced putative kinase 1 (PINK1) cause autosomal recessive Parkinson disease (PD). In mammalian cells, mutant PINK1 has been reported to promote fission or inhibit fusion in mitochondria; however, the mechanism by which this process occurs remains elusive. Using an ecdysone-inducible expression system in mammalian dopaminergic neuronal cells, we report here that human mutant PINK1 (L347P and W437X) mediates an overall fission effect by increasing the ratio of mitochondrial fission over fusion proteins, leading to excessive dysfunctional fragmented mitochondria. Knocking down endogenous Pink1 produces similar effects. In contrast, overexpressing human wild type PINK1 produces a pro-fusion effect by increasing the ratio of mitochondrial fusion/fission proteins without resulting in functionally compromised mitochondria. Parkin knockdown blocks the imbalance in fission/fusion proteins. Furthermore, overexpressing parkin and ubiquitin increases degradation of the mitochondrial fission hFis1 protein, suggesting PINK1 and parkin maintain proper mitochondrial function and integrity via the fission/fusion machinery. Through genetic manipulations and treatment with the small molecule mitochondrial division inhibitor (mdivi-1), which inhibits DLP1/Drp1, both structural and functional mitochondrial defects induced by mutant PINK1 were attenuated, highlighting a potential novel therapeutic avenue for Parkinson disease.
22354088	Mutations in phosphatase and tensin homologue-induced kinase 1 (PINK1) cause recessively inherited Parkinson's disease (PD), a neurodegenerative disorder linked to mitochondrial dysfunction. In healthy mitochondria, PINK1 is rapidly degraded in a process involving both mitochondrial proteases and the proteasome. However, when mitochondrial import is compromised by depolarization, PINK1 accumulates on the mitochondrial surface where it recruits the PD-linked E3 ubiquitin ligase Parkin from the cytosol, which in turn mediates the autophagic destruction of the dysfunctional organelles. Using an unbiased RNA-mediated interference (RNAi)-based screen, we identified four mitochondrial proteases, mitochondrial processing peptidase (MPP), presenilin-associated rhomboid-like protease (PARL), m-AAA and ClpXP, involved in PINK1 degradation. We find that PINK1 turnover is particularly sensitive to even modest reductions in MPP levels. Moreover, PINK1 cleavage by MPP is coupled to import such that reducing MPP activity induces PINK1 accumulation at the mitochondrial surface, leading to Parkin recruitment and mitophagy. These results highlight a new role for MPP in PINK1 import and mitochondrial quality control via the PINK1-Parkin pathway.
21637291	Mutations in PTEN-induced kinase 1 (PINK1) are associated with a familial syndrome related to Parkinson's disease (PD). We previously reported that stable neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cell lines with reduced expression of endogenous PINK1 exhibit mitochondrial fragmentation, increased mitochondria-derived superoxide, induction of compensatory macroautophagy/mitophagy and a low level of ongoing cell death. In this study, we investigated the ability of protein kinase A (PKA) to confer protection in this model, focusing on its subcellular targeting. Either: (1) treatment with pharmacological PKA activators; (2) transient expression of a constitutively active form of mitochondria-targeted PKA; or (3) transient expression of wild-type A kinase anchoring protein 1 (AKAP1), a scaffold that targets endogenous PKA to mitochondria, reversed each of the phenotypes attributed to loss of PINK1 in SH-SY5Y cells, and rescued parameters of mitochondrial respiratory dysfunction. Mitochondrial and lysosomal changes in primary cortical neurons derived from PINK1 knockout mice or subjected to PINK1 RNAi were also reversed by the activation of PKA. PKA phosphorylates the rat dynamin-related protein 1 isoform 1 (Drp1) at serine 656 (homologous to human serine 637), inhibiting its pro-fission function. Mimicking phosphorylation of Drp1 recapitulated many of the protective effects of AKAP1/PKA. These data indicate that redirecting endogenous PKA to mitochondria can compensate for deficiencies in PINK1 function, highlighting the importance of compartmentalized signaling networks in mitochondrial quality control.
21408142	PINK1 and Parkin mutations cause recessive Parkinson's disease (PD). In Drosophila and SH-SY5Y cells, Parkin is recruited by PINK1 to damaged mitochondria, where it ubiquitinates Mitofusins and consequently promotes mitochondrial fission and mitophagy.Here, we investigated the impact of mutations in endogenous PINK1 and Parkin on the ubiquitination of mitochondrial fusion and fission factors and the mitochondrial network structure. Treating control fibroblasts with mitochondrial membrane potential (Deltapsi) inhibitors or H(2)O(2) resulted in ubiquitination of Mfn1/2 but not of OPA1 or Fis1. Ubiquitination of Mitofusins through the PINK1/Parkin pathway was observed within 1 h of treatment. Upon combined inhibition of Deltapsi and the ubiquitin proteasome system (UPS), no ubiquitination of Mitofusins was detected. Regarding morphological changes, we observed a trend towards increased mitochondrial branching in PD patient cells upon mitochondrial stress.For the first time in PD patient-derived cells, we demonstrate that mutations in PINK1 and Parkin impair ubiquitination of Mitofusins. In the presence of UPS inhibitors, ubiquitinated Mitofusin is deubiquitinated by the UPS but not degraded, suggesting that the UPS is involved in Mitofusin degradation.
21115803	PINK1 is a mitochondrial kinase mutated in some familial cases of Parkinson's disease. It has been found to work in the same pathway as the E3 ligase Parkin in the maintenance of flight muscles and dopaminergic neurons in Drosophila melanogaster and to recruit cytosolic Parkin to mitochondria to mediate mitophagy in mammalian cells. Although PINK1 has a predicted mitochondrial import sequence, its cellular and submitochondrial localization remains unclear in part because it is rapidly degraded. In this study, we report that the mitochondrial inner membrane rhomboid protease presenilin-associated rhomboid-like protein (PARL) mediates cleavage of PINK1 dependent on mitochondrial membrane potential. In the absence of PARL, the constitutive degradation of PINK1 is inhibited, stabilizing a 60-kD form inside mitochondria. When mitochondrial membrane potential is dissipated, PINK1 accumulates as a 63-kD full-length form on the outer mitochondrial membrane, where it can recruit Parkin to impaired mitochondria. Thus, differential localization to the inner and outer mitochondrial membranes appears to regulate PINK1 stability and function.
20940149	Mutations in DJ-1, PINK1 (PTEN-induced putative kinase 1) and parkin all cause recessive parkinsonism in humans, but the relationships between these genes are not clearly defined. One event associated with loss of any of these genes is altered mitochondrial function. Recent evidence suggests that turnover of damaged mitochondria by autophagy might be central to the process of recessive parkinsonism. Here, we show that loss of DJ-1 leads to loss of mitochondrial polarization, fragmentation of mitochondria and accumulation of markers of autophagy (LC3 punctae and lipidation) around mitochondria in human dopaminergic cells. These effects are due to endogenous oxidative stress, as antioxidants will reverse all of them. Similar to PINK1 and parkin, DJ-1 also limits mitochondrial fragmentation in response to the mitochondrial toxin rotenone. Furthermore, overexpressed parkin will protect against loss of DJ-1 and, although DJ-1 does not alter PINK1 mitochondrial phenotypes, DJ-1 is still active against rotenone-induced damage in the absence of PINK1. None of the three proteins complex together using size exclusion chromatography. These data suggest that DJ-1 works in parallel to the PINK1/parkin pathway to maintain mitochondrial function in the presence of an oxidative environment.
24999239	Mitophagy facilitates the selective elimination of impaired or depolarized mitochondria through targeting the latter to autophagosomes. Parkin becomes localized to depolarized mitochondria in a PINK1-dependent manner and polyubiquitinates multiple mitochondrial outer membrane proteins. This permits ubiquitin-binding proteins (e.g., p62 and NBR1) to target impaired mitochondria to autophagosomes via Atg8/LC3II. Bcl-2 family proteins regulate mitochondrial outer membrane permeabilization during apoptosis and can also influence macroautophagy via interactions with Beclin-1. Here, we show that Parkin-dependent mitophagy is antagonized by prosurvival members of the Bcl-2 family (e.g., Bcl-xL and Mcl-1) in a Beclin-1-independent manner. Bcl-2 proteins suppressed mitophagy through inhibition of Parkin translocation to depolarized mitochondria. Consistent with this, Parkin translocation to mitochondria was enhanced by BH3-only proteins or a BH3-only mimetic. Taken together with their role as regulators of apoptosis-associated mitochondrial permeabilization, as well as mitochondrial fission/fusion dynamics, this suggests that Bcl-2 family proteins act as global regulators of mitochondrial homeostasis.
26471730	Mutations in the PTEN-induced kinase 1 (PINK1) are causative of autosomal recessive Parkinson's disease (PD). We have previously reported that PINK1 is activated by mitochondrial depolarisation and phosphorylates serine 65 (Ser(65)) of the ubiquitin ligase Parkin and ubiquitin to stimulate Parkin E3 ligase activity. Here, we have employed quantitative phosphoproteomics to search for novel PINK1-dependent phosphorylation targets in HEK (human embryonic kidney) 293 cells stimulated by mitochondrial depolarisation. This led to the identification of 14,213 phosphosites from 4,499 gene products. Whilst most phosphosites were unaffected, we strikingly observed three members of a sub-family of Rab GTPases namely Rab8A, 8B and 13 that are all phosphorylated at the highly conserved residue of serine 111 (Ser(111)) in response to PINK1 activation. Using phospho-specific antibodies raised against Ser(111) of each of the Rabs, we demonstrate that Rab Ser(111) phosphorylation occurs specifically in response to PINK1 activation and is abolished in HeLa PINK1 knockout cells and mutant PINK1 PD patient-derived fibroblasts stimulated by mitochondrial depolarisation. We provide evidence that Rab8A GTPase Ser(111) phosphorylation is not directly regulated by PINK1 in vitro and demonstrate in cells the time course of Ser(111) phosphorylation of Rab8A, 8B and 13 is markedly delayed compared to phosphorylation of Parkin at Ser(65). We further show mechanistically that phosphorylation at Ser(111) significantly impairs Rab8A activation by its cognate guanine nucleotide exchange factor (GEF), Rabin8 (by using the Ser111Glu phosphorylation mimic). These findings provide the first evidence that PINK1 is able to regulate the phosphorylation of Rab GTPases and indicate that monitoring phosphorylation of Rab8A/8B/13 at Ser(111) may represent novel biomarkers of PINK1 activity in vivo. Our findings also suggest that disruption of Rab GTPase-mediated signalling may represent a major mechanism in the neurodegenerative cascade of Parkinson's disease.
20057503	Mutations in the PINK1 gene cause autosomal recessive Parkinson's disease. The PINK1 gene encodes a protein kinase that is mitochondrially cleaved to generate two mature isoforms. In addition to its protective role against mitochondrial dysfunction and apoptosis, PINK1 is also known to regulate mitochondrial dynamics acting upstream of the PD-related protein Parkin. Recent data showed that mitochondrial Parkin promotes the autophagic degradation of dysfunctional mitochondria, and that stable PINK1 silencing may have an indirect role in mitophagy activation. Here we report a new interaction between PINK1 and Beclin1, a key pro-autophagic protein already implicated in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's and Huntington's diseases. Both PINK1 N- and C-terminal are required for the interaction, suggesting that full-length PINK1, and not its cleaved isoforms, interacts with Beclin1. We also demonstrate that PINK1 significantly enhances basal and starvation-induced autophagy, which is reduced by knocking down Beclin1 expression or by inhibiting the Beclin1 partner Vps34. A mutant, PINK1(W437X), interaction of which with Beclin1 is largely impaired, lacks the ability to enhance autophagy, whereas this is not observed for PINK1(G309D), a mutant with defective kinase activity but unaltered ability to bind Beclin1. These findings identify a new function of PINK1 and further strengthen the link between autophagy and proteins implicated in the neurodegenerative process.
28933786	Parkinson's disease (PD) is one of the most common neurodegenerative diseases, characterized by degeneration of dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra. alpha-synuclein (alpha-syn) and PTEN-induced putative kinase (PINK)1 are two critical proteins associated with the pathogenesis of PD. alpha-syn induces mitochondrial deficits and apoptosis, PINK1 was found to alleviate alpha-syn-induced toxicity, but the mechanistic details remain obscure. Here, we show that PINK1 interacts with alpha-syn mainly in the cytoplasm, where it initiates autophagy. This interaction was dependent on the kinase activity of PINK1 and was abolished by deletion of the kinase domain or a G309D point mutation, an inactivating mutation in the kinase domain. Interaction between PINK1 and alpha-syn stimulated the removal of excess alpha-syn, which prevented mitochondrial deficits and apoptosis. Our findings provide evidence for a novel mechanism underlying the protective effects of PINK1 against alpha-syn-induced neurodegeneration and highlight a novel therapeutic target for PD treatment.
27679849	The PTEN-induced putative kinase 1 (PINK1)/Parkin pathway can tag damaged mitochondria and trigger their degradation by mitophagy. Before the onset of mitophagy, the pathway blocks mitochondrial motility by causing Miro degradation. PINK1 activates Parkin by phosphorylating both Parkin and ubiquitin. PINK1, however, has other mitochondrial substrates, including Miro (also called RhoT1 and -2), although the significance of those substrates is less clear. We show that mimicking PINK1 phosphorylation of Miro on S156 promoted the interaction of Parkin with Miro, stimulated Miro ubiquitination and degradation, recruited Parkin to the mitochondria, and via Parkin arrested axonal transport of mitochondria. Although Miro S156E promoted Parkin recruitment it was insufficient to trigger mitophagy in the absence of broader PINK1 action. In contrast, mimicking phosphorylation of Miro on T298/T299 inhibited PINK1-induced Miro ubiquitination, Parkin recruitment, and Parkin-dependent mitochondrial arrest. The effects of the T298E/T299E phosphomimetic were dominant over S156E substitution. We propose that the status of Miro phosphorylation influences the decision to undergo Parkin-dependent mitochondrial arrest, which, in the context of PINK1 action on other substrates, can restrict mitochondrial dynamics before mitophagy.
26892626	Mitochondrial quality control and clearance of damaged mitochondria through mitophagy are important cellular activities. Studies have shown that PTEN-induced putative protein kinase 1 (PINK1) and Parkin play central roles in triggering mitophagy; however, little is known regarding the mechanism by which PINK1 modulates mitophagy in response to reactive oxygen species (ROS)-induced stress. In this study, chlorpyrifos (CPF)-induced ROS caused mitochondrial damage and subsequent engulfing of mitochondria in double-membrane autophagic vesicles, indicating that clearance of damaged mitochondria is due to mitophagy. CPF treatment resulted in PINK1 stabilization on the outer mitochondrial membrane and subsequently increased Parkin recruitment from the cytosol to the abnormal mitochondria. We found that PINK1 physically interacts with Parkin in the mitochondria of CPF-treated cells. Furthermore, a knockdown of PINK1 strongly inhibited the LC3-II protein level by blocking Parkin recruitment. This indicates that CPF-induced mitophagy is due to PINK1 stabilization in mitochondria. We observed that PINK1 stabilization was selectively regulated by ROS-mediated c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) and extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2 (ERK1/2) signaling activation but not p38 signaling. In the mitochondria of CPF-exposed cells, pretreatment with specific inhibitors of JNK and ERK1/2 significantly decreased PINK1 stabilization and Parkin recruitment and blocked the LC3-II protein level. Specifically, JNK and ERK1/2 inhibition also dramatically blocked the interaction between PINK1 and Parkin. Our results demonstrated that PINK1 regulation plays a critical role in CPF-induced mitophagy. The simple interpretation of these results is that JNK and ERK1/2 signaling regulates PINK1/Parkin-dependent mitophagy in the mitochondria of CPF-treated cells. Overall, this study proposes a novel molecular regulatory mechanism of PINK1 stabilization under CPF exposure.
28914586	Autophagic and mitophagic defects are consistently observed in Alzheimer's disease-affected brains. However, the mechanistic defects underlying these anatomical lesions remained unexplained. We have delineated a molecular cascade by which PSEN1 and PSEN2 (presenilins 1 and 2) control PINK1 transcription and function by an AICD-mediated FOXO3a-dependent mechanism. Further, we establish that PARK2 (parkin) acts upstream to PINK1 and regulates its function by a PSEN-dependent mechanism. Our study thus demonstrates a functional interplay between PSEN and PINK1 and establishes a feedback process by which PARK2 and PINK1 could control mitochondrial dysfunction and autophagic processes in various neurodegenerative pathologies including Alzheimer's and Parkinson's diseases.
28945249	Damaged mitochondria undergo mitophagy, a specialized form of autophagy that is initiated by the protein kinase PINK1 and the ubiquitin E3 ligase Parkin. Ubiquitin-specific protease USP30 antagonizes Parkin-mediated ubiquitination events on mitochondria and is a key negative regulator of mitophagy. Parkin and USP30 both show a preference for assembly or disassembly, respectively, of Lys6-linked polyubiquitin, a chain type that has not been well studied. Here we report crystal structures of human USP30 bound to monoubiquitin and Lys6-linked diubiquitin, which explain how USP30 achieves Lys6-linkage preference through unique ubiquitin binding interfaces. We assess the interplay between USP30, PINK1 and Parkin and show that distally phosphorylated ubiquitin chains impair USP30 activity. Lys6-linkage-specific affimers identify numerous mitochondrial substrates for this modification, and we show that USP30 regulates Lys6-polyubiquitinated TOM20. Our work provides insights into the architecture, activity and regulation of USP30, which will aid drug design against this and related enzymes.
22872702	Mutations in several genes, including Parkin, PTEN-induced kinase 1 (Pink1) and DJ-1, are associated with rare inherited forms of Parkinson's disease (PD). Despite recent attention on the function of these genes, the interplay between DJ-1, Pink1 and Parkin in PD pathogenesis remains unclear. In particular, whether these genes regulate mitochondrial control pathways in neurons is highly controversial. Here we report that Pink1-dependent Parkin translocation does occur in mouse cortical neurons in response to a variety of mitochondrial damaging agents. This translocation only occurs in the absence of antioxidants in the neuronal culturing medium, implicating a key role of reactive oxygen species (ROS) in this response. Consistent with these observations, ROS blockers also prevent Parkin recruitment in mouse embryonic fibroblasts. Loss of DJ-1, a gene linked to ROS management, results in increased stress-induced Parkin recruitment and increased mitophagy. Expression of wild-type DJ-1, but not a cysteine-106 mutant associated with defective ROS response, rescues this accelerated Parkin recruitment. Interestingly, DJ-1 levels increase at mitochondria following oxidative damage in both fibroblasts and neurons, and this process also depends on Parkin and possibly Pink1. These results not only highlight the presence of a Parkin/Pink1-mediated pathway of mitochondrial quality control (MQC) in neurons, they also delineate a complex reciprocal relationship between DJ-1 and the Pink1/Parkin pathway of MQC.
23060438	BACKGROUND: Parkin is recruited to defective mitochondria to promote degradation by an autophagy mechanism (mitophagy). RESULTS: VDACs specifically interact with Parkin on defective mitochondria and are required for efficient targeting of Parkin to mitochondria and subsequent mitophagy. CONCLUSION: VDACs recruit Parkin to defective mitochondria. SIGNIFICANCE: A novel mechanistic aspect of Parkin-dependent mitophagy is proposed that may be relevant to Parkinson disease. Mutations in the ubiquitin ligase Parkin and the serine/threonine kinase PINK1 can cause Parkinson disease. Both proteins function in the elimination of defective mitochondria by autophagy. In this process, activation of PINK1 mediates translocation of Parkin from the cytosol to mitochondria by an unknown mechanism. To better understand how Parkin is targeted to defective mitochondria, we purified affinity-tagged Parkin from mitochondria and identified Parkin-associated proteins by mass spectrometry. The three most abundant interacting proteins were the voltage-dependent anion channels 1, 2, and 3 (VDACs 1, 2, and 3), pore-forming proteins in the outer mitochondrial membrane. We demonstrate that Parkin specifically interacts with VDACs when the function of mitochondria is disrupted by treating cells with the proton uncoupler carbonyl cyanide p-chlorophenylhydrazone. In the absence of all three VDACs, the recruitment of Parkin to defective mitochondria and subsequent mitophagy are impaired. Each VDAC is sufficient to support Parkin recruitment and mitophagy, suggesting that VDACs can function redundantly. We hypothesize that VDACs serve as mitochondrial docking sites to recruit Parkin from the cytosol to defective mitochondria.
20404107	Parkinson's disease (PD) is a prevalent neurodegenerative disorder. Recent identification of genes linked to familial forms of PD such as Parkin and PINK1 (PTEN-induced putative kinase 1) has revealed that ubiquitylation and mitochondrial integrity are key factors in disease pathogenesis. However, the exact mechanism underlying the functional interplay between Parkin-catalyzed ubiquitylation and PINK1-regulated mitochondrial quality control remains an enigma. In this study, we show that PINK1 is rapidly and constitutively degraded under steady-state conditions in a mitochondrial membrane potential-dependent manner and that a loss in mitochondrial membrane potential stabilizes PINK1 mitochondrial accumulation. Furthermore, PINK1 recruits Parkin from the cytoplasm to mitochondria with low membrane potential to initiate the autophagic degradation of damaged mitochondria. Interestingly, the ubiquitin ligase activity of Parkin is repressed in the cytoplasm under steady-state conditions; however, PINK1-dependent mitochondrial localization liberates the latent enzymatic activity of Parkin. Some pathogenic mutations of PINK1 and Parkin interfere with the aforementioned events, suggesting an etiological importance. These results provide crucial insight into the pathogenic mechanisms of PD.
28281653	Therapeutic targets are needed to develop neuroprotective treatments for Parkinson's disease (PD). Mitophagy, the selective autophagic elimination of dysfunctional mitochondria, is essential for the maintenance of mitochondrial integrity and is predominantly regulated by the PINK1/Parkin-mediated pathway. Loss of function mutations in Parkin and PINK1 cause an accumulation of dysfunctional mitochondria, leading to nigral neurodegeneration and early-onset PD with a high penetrance rate. We previously identified an asymptomatic homozygous Parkin mutation carrier who had not developed PD by her eighth decade despite the loss of functional Parkin. Here we discover a putative mechanism that protects her against PD. In contrast to Parkin-related PD patient-derived cells, the asymptomatic carrier cells show preserved mitochondrial function and mitophagy which is mediated by mitochondrial receptor Nip3-like protein X (Nix). Nix-mediated mitophagy was not affected by PINK1 knockdown. Both genetic and pharmacological induction of Nix restores mitophagy in PINK1- and Parkin-related PD patient cell lines, confirming its ability to induce mitophagy in the absence of PINK1/Parkin-mediated pathway. Moreover, Nix over-expression improves mitochondrial ATP production in these patient cells. Our results demonstrate that Nix can serve as an alternative mediator of mitophagy to maintain mitochondrial turnover, identifying Nix as a promising target for neuroprotective treatment in PINK1/Parkin-related PD.
23256036	Parkinson's disease genes PINK1 and parkin encode kinase and ubiquitin ligase, respectively. The gene products PINK1 and Parkin are implicated in mitochondrial autophagy, or mitophagy. Upon the loss of mitochondrial membrane potential (DeltaPsim), cytosolic Parkin is recruited to the mitochondria by PINK1 through an uncharacterised mechanism - an initial step triggering sequential events in mitophagy. This study reports that Ser65 in the ubiquitin-like domain (Ubl) of Parkin is phosphorylated in a PINK1-dependent manner upon depolarisation of DeltaPsim. The introduction of mutations at Ser65 suggests that phosphorylation of Ser65 is required not only for the efficient translocation of Parkin, but also for the degradation of mitochondrial proteins in mitophagy. Phosphorylation analysis of Parkin pathogenic mutants also suggests Ser65 phosphorylation is not sufficient for Parkin translocation. Our study partly uncovers the molecular mechanism underlying the PINK1-dependent mitochondrial translocation and activation of Parkin as an initial step of mitophagy.
25557247	Parkinson's disease (PD) is characterized by progressive dopaminergic neuronal loss and the formation of abnormal protein aggregates, referred to as Lewy bodies (LBs). PINK1 is a serine/threonine protein kinase that protects cells from stress-induced mitochondrial dysfunction. PINK1 gene mutations cause one form of autosomal recessive early-onset PD. Transglutaminase 2 (TG2) is an intracellular protein cross-linking enzyme that has an important role in LB formation during PD pathogenesis. This study identifies PINK1 as a novel TG2 binding partner and shows that PINK1 stabilizes the half-life of TG2 via inhibition of TG2 ubiquitination and subsequent proteasomal degradation. PINK1 affects TG2 stability in a kinase-dependent manner. In addition, PINK1 directly phosphorylates TG2 in carbonyl cyanide m-chlorophenyl hydrazine-induced mitochondrial damaged states, thereby enhancing TG2 accumulation and intracellular protein cross-linking products. This study further confirms the functional link between upstream PINK1 and downstream TG2 in Drosophila melanogaster. These data suggest that PINK1 positively regulates TG2 activity, which may be closely associated with aggresome formation in neuronal cells.
28194437	The heme oxygenase-1 (Hmox1; HO-1) pathway was tested for defense of mitochondrial quality control in cardiomyocyte-specific Hmox1 KO mice (HO-1[CM]-/-) exposed to oxidative stress (100% O2). After 48 hours of exposure, these mice showed persistent cardiac inflammation and oxidative tissue damage that caused sarcomeric disruption, cardiomyocyte death, left ventricular dysfunction, and cardiomyopathy, while control hearts showed minimal damage. After hyperoxia, HO-1(CM)-/- hearts showed suppression of the Pgc-1alpha/nuclear respiratory factor-1 (NRF-1) axis, swelling, low electron density mitochondria by electron microscopy (EM), increased cell death, and extensive collagen deposition. The damage mechanism involves structurally deficient autophagy/mitophagy, impaired LC3II processing, and failure to upregulate Pink1- and Park2-mediated mitophagy. The mitophagy pathway was suppressed through loss of NRF-1 binding to proximal promoter sites on both genes. These results indicate that cardiac Hmox1 induction not only prevents heme toxicity, but also regulates the timing and registration of genetic programs for mitochondrial quality control that limit cell death, pathological remodeling, and cardiac fibrosis.
27737933	The SPFH (stomatin, prohibitin, flotillin, HflC/K) superfamily is composed of scaffold proteins that form ring-like structures and locally specify the protein-lipid composition in a variety of cellular membranes. Stomatin-like protein 2 (SLP2) is a member of this superfamily that localizes to the mitochondrial inner membrane (IM) where it acts as a membrane organizer. Here, we report that SLP2 anchors a large protease complex composed of the rhomboid protease PARL and the i-AAA protease YME1L, which we term the SPY complex (for SLP2-PARL-YME1L). Association with SLP2 in the SPY complex regulates PARL-mediated processing of PTEN-induced kinase PINK1 and the phosphatase PGAM5 in mitochondria. Moreover, SLP2 inhibits the stress-activated peptidase OMA1, which can bind to SLP2 and cleaves PGAM5 in depolarized mitochondria. SLP2 restricts OMA1-mediated processing of the dynamin-like GTPase OPA1 allowing stress-induced mitochondrial hyperfusion under starvation conditions. Together, our results reveal an important role of SLP2 membrane scaffolds for the spatial organization of IM proteases regulating mitochondrial dynamics, quality control, and cell survival.
27050454	During proteasomal stress, cells can alleviate the accumulation of polyubiquitinated proteins by targeting them to perinuclear aggresomes for autophagic degradation, but the mechanism underlying the activation of this compensatory pathway remains unclear. Here we report that PINK1-s, a short form of Parkinson disease (PD)-related protein kinase PINK1 (PTEN induced putative kinase 1), is a major regulator of aggresome formation. PINK1-s is extremely unstable due to its recognition by the N-end rule pathway, and tends to accumulate in the cytosol during proteasomal stress. Overexpression of PINK1-s induces aggresome formation in cells with normal proteasomal activities, while loss of PINK1-s function leads to a significant decrease in the efficiency of aggresome formation induced by proteasomal inhibition. PINK1-s exerts its effect through phosphorylation of the ubiquitin-binding protein SQSTM1 (sequestosome 1) and increasing its ability to sequester polyubiquitinated proteins into aggresomes. These findings pinpoint PINK1-s as a sensor of proteasomal activities that transduces the proteasomal impairment signal to the aggresome formation machinery.
26498506	Recessive mutations in the PTEN-induced putative kinase 1 (PINK1) gene cause early-onset Parkinson's disease (PD). We investigated the interaction between endocannabinoid (eCB) and dopaminergic transmission at corticostriatal synapses in PINK1 deficient mice. Whole-cell patch-clamp and conventional recordings of striatal medium spiny neurons (MSNs) were made from slices of PINK1(-/-), heterozygous PINK1(+/-) mice and wild-type littermates (PINK1(+/+)). In PINK1(+/+) mice, CB1 receptor (CB1R) activation reduced spontaneous excitatory postsynaptic currents (sEPSCs). Likewise, CB1R agonists (ACEA, WIN55,212-3 and HU210) induced a dose-dependent reduction of cortically-evoked excitatory postsynaptic potential (eEPSP) amplitude. While CB1R agonists retained their inhibitory effect in heterozygous PINK1(+/-) mice, conversely, in PINK1(-/-) mice they failed to modulate sEPSC amplitude. Similarly, CB1R activation failed to reduce eEPSP amplitude in PINK1(-/-) mice. Parallel biochemical measurements revealed no significant difference in the levels of the two main eCBs, 2-arachidonoylglycerol (2-AG) and anandamide (AEA) in PINK1(-/-) striata. Similarly, no change was observed in the enzymatic activity of both fatty acid amide hydrolase (FAAH) and monoacylglycerol lipase (MAGL), responsible for eCB hydrolysis. Instead, a significant reduction of binding ability of CB1R agonists was found in PINK1(-/-) mice. Notably, the CB1R-dependent inhibition of synaptic activity was restored either by amphetamine or after chronic treatment with the D2 dopamine receptor agonist quinpirole. Additionally, CB1R binding activity returned to control levels after chronic pretreatment with quinpirole. Consistent with the hypothesis of a close interplay with dopaminergic neurotransmission, our findings show a CB1R dysfunction at corticostriatal synapses in PINK1(-/-), but not in PINK1(+/-) mice, and provide a mechanistic link to the distinct plasticity deficits observed in both genotypes.
26365381	Damaged mitochondria are detrimental to cellular homeostasis. One mechanism for removal of damaged mitochondria involves the PINK1-PARKIN pathway, which poly-ubiquitylates damaged mitochondria to promote mitophagy. We report that assembly of ubiquitin chains on mitochondria triggers autophagy adaptor recruitment concomitantly with activation of the TBK1 kinase, which physically associates with OPTN, NDP52, and SQSTM1. TBK1 activation in HeLa cells requires OPTN and NDP52 and OPTN ubiquitin chain binding. In addition to the known role of S177 phosphorylation in OPTN on ATG8 recruitment, TBK1-dependent phosphorylation on S473 and S513 promotes ubiquitin chain binding in vitro as well as TBK1 activation, OPTN mitochondrial retention, and efficient mitophagy in vivo. These data reveal a self-reinforcing positive feedback mechanism that coordinates TBK1-dependent autophagy adaptor phosphorylation with the assembly of ubiquitin chains on mitochondria to facilitate efficient mitophagy, and mechanistically links genes mutated in Parkinson's disease and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis in a common selective autophagy pathway.
25969509	The PTEN-induced putative kinase protein 1 (PINK1) and ubiquitin (UB) ligase PARKIN direct damaged mitochondria for mitophagy. PINK1 promotes PARKIN recruitment to the mitochondrial outer membrane (MOM) for ubiquitylation of MOM proteins with canonical and noncanonical UB chains. PINK1 phosphorylates both Ser65 (S65) in the UB-like domain of PARKIN and the conserved Ser in UB itself, but the temporal sequence and relative importance of these events during PARKIN activation and mitochondria quality control remain poorly understood. Using "UB(S65A)-replacement," we find that PARKIN phosphorylation and activation, and ubiquitylation of Lys residues on a cohort of MOM proteins, occur similarly irrespective of the ability of the UB-replacement to be phosphorylated on S65. In contrast, polyubiquitin (poly-UB) chain synthesis, PARKIN retention on the MOM, and mitophagy are reduced in UB(S65A)-replacement cells. Analogous experiments examining roles of individual UB chain linkage types revealed the importance of K6 and K63 chain linkages in mitophagy, but phosphorylation of K63 chains by PINK1 did not enhance binding to candidate mitophagy receptors optineurin (OPTN), sequestosome-1 (p62), and nuclear dot protein 52 (NDP52) in vitro. Parallel reaction monitoring proteomics of total mitochondria revealed the absence of p-S65-UB when PARKIN cannot build UB chains, and <0.16% of the monomeric UB pool underwent S65 phosphorylation upon mitochondrial damage. Combining p-S65-UB and p-S65-PARKIN in vitro showed accelerated transfer of nonphosphorylated UB to PARKIN itself, its substrate mitochondrial Rho GTPase (MIRO), and UB. Our data further define a feed-forward mitochondrial ubiquitylation pathway involving PARKIN activation upon phosphorylation, UB chain synthesis on the MOM, UB chain phosphorylation, and further PARKIN recruitment and enzymatic amplification via binding to phosphorylated UB chains.
25868250	PTEN-induced putative kinase 1 (PINK1), a Parkinson's disease (PD)-related protein, has two isoforms, the mitochondria-localized full-length isoform PINK1FL and the cytoplasm-localized short isoform PINK1-cyto. Studies have suggested that PINK1FL can selectively accumulate at the surface of damaged mitochondria and cooperate with another Parkinson's Disease-related protein PARKIN to trigger the degradation of MIRO1, a mitochondria trafficking regulator. The functions of PINK1-cyto are, however, not yet clear. To investigate the functions of PINK1-cyto, we expressed different proteins in cultured HEK293 cells by transfecting it with different plasmids, and detected the protein levels by Western blot after expressing for 24 h. We found that in cultured HEK293 cells, PINK1-cyto could also cooperate with PARKIN degrade MIRO1 in the presence of CK23, and the regulatory subunit of Casein Kinase II. Interestingly, this function of CK2P was not dependent on CK2alpha, the catalytic subunit of Casein Kinase II. We also found that CK2P could promote the direct interaction between PINK1-cyto and MIRO1 by immunocoprecipitation analysis. This result suggested that in addition to CK2alpha, CK2beta could also form a kinase complex.
25670069	DnaJ-1 or hsp40/hdj-1 (DJ1) is a multi-functional protein whose mutations cause autosomal recessive early-onset Parkinson's disease (PD). DJ1 loss of function disrupts mitochondrial function, but the signalling pathway, whereby it interferes with energy metabolism, is unknown. In the present study, we found that mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) obtained from DJ1-null (dj1-/-) mice showed higher glycolytic rate than those from wild-type (WT) DJ1 (dj1+/+). This effect could be counteracted by the expression of the full-length cDNA encoding the WT DJ1, but not its DJ1-L166P mutant form associated with PD. Loss of DJ1 increased hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha (Hif1alpha) protein abundance and cell proliferation. To understand the molecular mechanism responsible for these effects, we focused on phosphatase and tensin homologue deleted on chromosome 10 (PTEN)-induced protein kinase-1 (Pink1), a PD-associated protein whose loss was recently reported to up-regulate glucose metabolism and to sustain cell proliferation [Requejo-Aguilar et al. (2014) Nat. Commun. 5, 4514]. Noticeably, we found that the alterations in glycolysis, Hif1alpha and proliferation of DJ1-deficient cells were abrogated by the expression of Pink1. Moreover, we found that loss of DJ1 decreased pink1 mRNA and Pink1 protein levels and that DJ1, by binding with Foxo3a (forkhead box O3a) transcription factor, directly interacted with the pink1 promoter stimulating its transcriptional activity. These results indicate that DJ1 regulates cell metabolism and proliferation through Pink1.
25108683	Parkinson's disease (PD) is one of the major neurodegenerative disorders. Mitochondrial malfunction is implicated in PD pathogenesis. Phosphatase and tensin homolog deleted on chromosome 10 (PTEN)-induced putative kinase 1 (PINK1), a serine/threonine kinase, plays an important role in the quality control of mitochondria and more than 70 PINK1 mutations have been identified to cause early-onset PD. However, the regulation of PINK1 gene expression remains elusive. In the present study, we identified the transcription start site (TSS) of the human PINK1 gene using switching mechanism at 5'end of RNA transcription (SMART RACE) assay. The TSS is located at 91 bp upstream of the translation start site ATG. The region with 104 bp was identified as the minimal promoter region by deletion analysis followed by dual luciferase assay. Four functional cis-acting nuclear factor kappa-light-chain-enhancer of activated B cells (NFkappaB)-binding sites within the PINK1 promoter were identified. NFkappaB overexpression led to the up-regulation of PINK1 expression in both HEK293 cells and SH-SY5Y cells. Consistently, lipopolysaccharide (LPS), a strong activator of NFkappaB, significantly increased PINK1 expression in SH-SY5Y cells. Taken together, our results clearly suggested that PINK1 expression is tightly regulated at its transcription level and NFkappaB is a positive regulator for PINK1 expression.
24671417	Mitochondrial transport plays an important role in matching mitochondrial distribution to localized energy production and calcium buffering requirements. Here, we demonstrate that Miro1, an outer mitochondrial membrane (OMM) protein crucial for the regulation of mitochondrial trafficking and distribution, is a substrate of the PINK1/Parkin mitochondrial quality control system in human dopaminergic neuroblastoma cells. Moreover, Miro1 turnover on damaged mitochondria is altered in Parkinson disease (PD) patient-derived fibroblasts containing a pathogenic mutation in the PARK2 gene (encoding Parkin). By analyzing the kinetics of Miro1 ubiquitination, we further demonstrate that mitochondrial damage triggers rapid (within minutes) and persistent Lys-27-type ubiquitination of Miro1 on the OMM, dependent on PINK1 and Parkin. Proteasomal degradation of Miro1 is then seen on a slower time scale, within 2-3 h of the onset of ubiquitination. We find Miro ubiquitination in dopaminergic neuroblastoma cells is independent of Miro1 phosphorylation at Ser-156 but is dependent on the recently identified Ser-65 residue within Parkin that is phosphorylated by PINK1. Interestingly, we find that Miro1 can stabilize phospho-mutant versions of Parkin on the OMM, suggesting that Miro is also part of a Parkin receptor complex. Moreover, we demonstrate that Ser-65 in Parkin is critical for regulating Miro levels upon mitochondrial damage in rodent cortical neurons. Our results provide new insights into the ubiquitination-dependent regulation of the Miro-mediated mitochondrial transport machinery by PINK1/Parkin and also suggest that disruption of this regulation may be implicated in Parkinson disease pathogenesis.
24475098	Mutations in PTEN-induced kinase 1 (PINK1) gene cause PARK6 familial Parkinsonism, and loss of the stability of PINK1 may also contribute to sporadic Parkinson's disease (PD). Degradation of PINK1 occurs predominantly through the ubiquitin proteasome system (UPS), however, to date, few of the proteins have been found to regulate the degradation of PINK1. Using the yeast two-hybrid system and pull-down methods, we identified bcl-2-associated athanogene 5 (BAG5), a BAG family member, directly interacted with PINK1. We showed that BAG5 stabilized PINK1 by decreasing the ubiquitination of PINK1. Interestingly, BAG5 rescued MPP(+)- and rotenone-induced mitochondria dysfunction by up-regulating PINK1 in vitro. In PINK1-null mice and MPTP-treated mice, BAG5 significantly increased in the substantia nigra pars compacta (SNpc) although PINK1 was decreased. Our findings indicated that BAG5, as a key protein to stabilize PINK1, is a promising therapeutic tool for preventing mitochondrial dysfunction following oxidative stress.
24189060	Parkinsonism typified by sporadic Parkinson disease is a prevalent neurodegenerative disease. Mutations in PINK1 (PTEN-induced putative kinase 1), a mitochondrial Ser/Thr protein kinase, or PARKIN, a ubiquitin-protein ligase, cause familial parkinsonism. The accumulation and autophosphorylation of PINK1 on damaged mitochondria results in the recruitment of Parkin, which ultimately triggers quarantine and/or degradation of the damaged mitochondria by the proteasome and autophagy. However, the molecular mechanism of PINK1 in dissipation of the mitochondrial membrane potential (DeltaPsim) has not been fully elucidated. Here we show by fluorescence-based techniques that the PINK1 complex formed following a decrease in DeltaPsim is composed of two PINK1 molecules and is correlated with intermolecular phosphorylation of PINK1. Disruption of complex formation by the PINK1 S402A mutation weakened Parkin recruitment onto depolarized mitochondria. The most disease-relevant mutations of PINK1 inhibit the complex formation. Taken together, these results suggest that formation of the complex containing dyadic PINK1 is an important step for Parkin recruitment onto damaged mitochondria.
23519076	Mutations in the PINK1 gene are a frequent cause of autosomal recessive Parkinson's disease (PD). PINK1 encodes a mitochondrial kinase with neuroprotective activity, implicated in maintaining mitochondrial homeostasis and function. In concurrence with Parkin, PINK1 regulates mitochondrial trafficking and degradation of damaged mitochondria through mitophagy. Moreover, PINK1 can activate autophagy by interacting with the pro-autophagic protein Beclin-1. Here, we report that, upon mitochondrial depolarization, PINK1 interacts with and phosphorylates Bcl-xL, an anti-apoptotic protein also known to inhibit autophagy through its binding to Beclin-1. PINK1-Bcl-xL interaction does not interfere either with Beclin-1 release from Bcl-xL or the mitophagy pathway; rather it protects against cell death by hindering the pro-apoptotic cleavage of Bcl-xL. Our data provide a functional link between PINK1, Bcl-xL and apoptosis, suggesting a novel mechanism through which PINK1 regulates cell survival. This pathway could be relevant for the pathogenesis of PD as well as other diseases including cancer.
21768365	Mutations in PTEN-induced kinase 1 (PINK1), a mitochondrial Ser/Thr kinase, cause an autosomal recessive form of Parkinson's disease (PD), PARK6. To investigate the mechanism of PINK1 pathogenesis, we used the Drosophila Pink1 knockout (KO) model. In mitochondria isolated from Pink1-KO flies, mitochondrial respiration driven by the electron transport chain (ETC) is significantly reduced. This reduction is the result of a decrease in ETC complex I and IV enzymatic activity. As a consequence, Pink1-KO flies also display a reduced mitochondrial ATP synthesis. Because mitochondrial dynamics is important for mitochondrial function and Pink1-KO flies have defects in mitochondrial fission, we explored whether fission machinery deficits underlie the bioenergetic defect in Pink1-KO flies. We found that the bioenergetic defects in the Pink1-KO can be ameliorated by expression of Drp1, a key molecule in mitochondrial fission. Further investigation of the ETC complex integrity in wild type, Pink1-KO, PInk1-KO/Drp1 transgenic, or Drp1 transgenic flies indicates that the reduced ETC complex activity is likely derived from a defect in the ETC complex assembly, which can be partially rescued by increasing mitochondrial fission. Taken together, these results suggest a unique pathogenic mechanism of PINK1 PD: The loss of PINK1 impairs mitochondrial fission, which causes defective assembly of the ETC complexes, leading to abnormal bioenergetics.
21437181	Recent publications suggest that the Parkinson's disease- (PD-) related PINK1/Parkin pathway promotes elimination of dysfunctional mitochondria by autophagy. We used tandem affinity purification (TAP), SDS-PAGE, and mass spectrometry as a first step towards identification of possible substrates for PINK1. The cellular abundance of selected identified interactors was investigated by Western blotting. Furthermore, one candidate gene was sequenced in 46 patients with atypical PD. In addition to two known binding partners (HSP90, CDC37), 12 proteins were identified using the TAP assay; four of which are mitochondrially localized (GRP75, HSP60, LRPPRC, and TUFM). Western blot analysis showed no differences in cellular abundance of these proteins comparing PINK1 mutant and control fibroblasts. When sequencing LRPPRC, four exonic synonymous changes and 20 polymorphisms in noncoding regions were detected. Our study provides a list of putative PINK1 binding partners, confirming previously described interactions, but also introducing novel mitochondrial proteins as potential components of the PINK1/Parkin mitophagy pathway.
21138942	Mutations in PTEN-induced kinase 1 (PINK1) cause early onset autosomal recessive Parkinson's disease (PD). PINK1 is a 63 kDa protein kinase, which exerts a neuroprotective function and is known to localize to mitochondria. Upon entry into the organelle, PINK1 is cleaved to produce a approximately 53 kDa protein (DeltaN-PINK1). In this paper, we show that PINK1 is cleaved between amino acids Ala-103 and Phe-104 to generate DeltaN-PINK1. We demonstrate that a reduced ability to cleave PINK1, and the consequent accumulation of full-length protein, results in mitochondrial abnormalities reminiscent of those observed in PINK1 knockout cells, including disruption of the mitochondrial network and a reduction in mitochondrial mass. Notably, we assessed three N-terminal PD-associated PINK1 mutations located close to the cleavage site and, while these do not prevent PINK1 cleavage, they alter the ratio of full-length to DeltaN-PINK1 protein in cells, resulting in an altered mitochondrial phenotype. Finally, we show that PINK1 interacts with the mitochondrial protease presenilin-associated rhomboid-like protein (PARL) and that loss of PARL results in aberrant PINK1 cleavage in mammalian cells. These combined results suggest that PINK1 cleavage is important for basal mitochondrial health and that PARL cleaves PINK1 to produce the DeltaN-PINK1 fragment.
19966284	Phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN)-induced putative kinase 1 (PINK1) and PARK2/Parkin mutations cause autosomal recessive forms of Parkinson's disease. Upon a loss of mitochondrial membrane potential (DeltaPsi(m)) in human cells, cytosolic Parkin has been reported to be recruited to mitochondria, which is followed by a stimulation of mitochondrial autophagy. Here, we show that the relocation of Parkin to mitochondria induced by a collapse of DeltaPsi(m) relies on PINK1 expression and that overexpression of WT but not of mutated PINK1 causes Parkin translocation to mitochondria, even in cells with normal DeltaPsi(m). We also show that once at the mitochondria, Parkin is in close proximity to PINK1, but we find no evidence that Parkin catalyzes PINK1 ubiquitination or that PINK1 phosphorylates Parkin. However, co-overexpression of Parkin and PINK1 collapses the normal tubular mitochondrial network into mitochondrial aggregates and/or large perinuclear clusters, many of which are surrounded by autophagic vacuoles. Our results suggest that Parkin, together with PINK1, modulates mitochondrial trafficking, especially to the perinuclear region, a subcellular area associated with autophagy. Thus by impairing this process, mutations in either Parkin or PINK1 may alter mitochondrial turnover which, in turn, may cause the accumulation of defective mitochondria and, ultimately, neurodegeneration in Parkinson's disease.
19276113	Loss-of-function mutations of phosphatase/tensin homolog deleted on chromosome 10 (PTEN)-induced putative kinase 1 (Pink1) (also known as Park6) identified in familial forms of Parkinson's disease (PD) are associated with compromised mitochondrial function. Emerging data suggest that Pink1 is an essential pro-survival factor that is induced in response to oxidative stress. However, the mechanisms regulating Pink1 expression under stress conditions remain unknown. Forkhead box, subgroup O (FOXO) transcription factors carry out distinct biological functions in response to different extracellular signals. Notably, FOXO factors possess evolutionarily conserved roles in protecting cells from oxidative stress-induced death. Here we report that the FOXO family member FOXO3a controls Pink1 transcription in both mouse and human cells subjected to growth factor deprivation and that this regulation is exerted through evolutionarily conserved FOXO binding elements. Induction of Pink1 by FOXO3a is crucial for survival signals in lymphocytes, as depletion of Pink1 sensitizes these cells to death induced by deprivation of an essential growth factor. Our data reveal that the role of FOXO factors in protecting cells from growth factor deprivation-triggered apoptosis has been underestimated and that FOXOs mediate this protection by transactivating anti-apoptotic effectors like Pink1. Given the essential role of Pink1 in combating cell death, our findings may help to dissect the mechanisms by which FOXO proteins function as anti-oxidative stress factors.
19167501	Parkinson's disease (PD) is characterized by the deterioration of dopaminergic neurons in the pars compacta of substantia nigra and the formation of intraneuronal protein inclusions. The etiology of PD is not known, but the recent identification of several mutation genes in familial PD has provided a rich understanding of the molecular mechanisms of PD pathology. Mutations in PTEN-induced putative kinase 1 (PINK1) and parkin are linked to early-onset autosomal recessive forms of familial PD. Here we show molecular and functional interactions between parkin and PINK1. Parkin selectively binds to PINK1 and upregulates PINK1 levels. In addition, PINK1 reduces the solubility of parkin, which induces the formation of microtubule-dependent cytoplasmic aggresomes. Our findings reveal that parkin and PINK1 affect each other's stability, solubility and tendency to form aggresomes, and have important implications regarding the formation of Lewy bodies.
19152501	Recessive mutations in Pink1 lead to a selective degeneration of dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra that is characteristic of Parkinson disease. Pink1 is a kinase that is targeted in part to mitochondria, and loss of Pink1 function can alter mitochondrial morphology and dynamics, thus supporting a link between mitochondrial dysfunction and Parkinson disease etiology. Here, we report the unbiased identification and confirmation of a mitochondrial multiprotein complex that contains Pink1, the atypical GTPase Miro, and the adaptor protein Milton. Our screen also identified an interaction between Pink1 and Mitofilin. Based on previously established functions for Miro and Milton in the trafficking of mitochondria along microtubules, we postulate here a role for Pink1 in mitochondrial trafficking. Using subcellular fractionation, we show that the overexpression of Miro and Milton, both of which are known to reside at the outer mitochondrial membrane, increases the mitochondrial Pink1 pool, suggesting a function of Pink1 at the outer membrane. Further, we document that Pink1 expressed without a mitochondrial targeting sequence can still be targeted to a mitochondria-enriched subcellular fraction via Miro and Milton. The latter finding is important for the interpretation of a previously reported protective effect of Pink1 expressed without a mitochondrial targeting sequence. Finally, we find that Miro and Milton expression suppresses altered mitochondrial morphology induced by loss of Pink1 function in cell culture. Our findings suggest that Pink1 functions in the trafficking of mitochondria in cells.
18443288	Mitochondria form dynamic tubular networks that undergo frequent morphological changes through fission and fusion, the imbalance of which can affect cell survival in general and impact synaptic transmission and plasticity in neurons in particular. Some core components of the mitochondrial fission/fusion machinery, including the dynamin-like GTPases Drp1, Mitofusin, Opa1, and the Drp1-interacting protein Fis1, have been identified. How the fission and fusion processes are regulated under normal conditions and the extent to which defects in mitochondrial fission/fusion are involved in various disease conditions are poorly understood. Mitochondrial malfunction tends to cause diseases with brain and skeletal muscle manifestations and has been implicated in neurodegenerative diseases such as Parkinson's disease (PD). Whether abnormal mitochondrial fission or fusion plays a role in PD pathogenesis has not been shown. Here, we show that Pink1, a mitochondria-targeted Ser/Thr kinase linked to familial PD, genetically interacts with the mitochondrial fission/fusion machinery and modulates mitochondrial dynamics. Genetic manipulations that promote mitochondrial fission suppress Drosophila Pink1 mutant phenotypes in indirect flight muscle and dopamine neurons, whereas decreased fission has opposite effects. In Drosophila and mammalian cells, overexpression of Pink1 promotes mitochondrial fission, whereas inhibition of Pink1 leads to excessive fusion. Our genetic interaction results suggest that Fis1 may act in-between Pink1 and Drp1 in controlling mitochondrial fission. These results reveal a cell biological role for Pink1 and establish mitochondrial fission/fusion as a paradigm for PD research. Compounds that modulate mitochondrial fission/fusion could have therapeutic value in PD intervention.
18359116	Mutation of PTEN-induced kinase 1 (PINK1), which encodes a putative mitochondrial serine/threonine kinase, leads to PARK6, an autosomal recessive form of familial Parkinson's disease. Although the precise function(s) of PINK1 protein is unknown, the recessive inheritance of this form of Parkinson's disease suggests loss of PINK1 function is closely associated with its pathogenesis. Here we report that PINK1 forms a complex with the molecular chaperones Hsp90 and Cdc37/p50 within cells, which appears to enhance its stability. When cells were treated with an Hsp90 inhibitor (geldanamycin or novobiocin), levels of PINK1 were greatly diminished, reflecting its rapid degradation via ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. Similarly, the half-life of a pathogenic PINK1 mutant (L347P) that did not interact with Hsp90 or Cdc37/p50 was only 30min, whereas that of wild-type PINK1 was 1h. These results strongly suggest that Hsp90 and Cdc37 are binding partners of PINK1 which regulate its stability.
17906618	In mice, targeted deletion of the serine protease HtrA2 (also known as Omi) causes mitochondrial dysfunction leading to a neurodegenerative disorder with parkinsonian features. In humans, point mutations in HtrA2 are a susceptibility factor for Parkinson's disease (PARK13 locus). Mutations in PINK1, a putative mitochondrial protein kinase, are associated with the PARK6 autosomal recessive locus for susceptibility to early-onset Parkinson's disease. Here we determine that HtrA2 interacts with PINK1 and that both are components of the same stress-sensing pathway. HtrA2 is phosphorylated on activation of the p38 pathway, occurring in a PINK1-dependent manner at a residue adjacent to a position found mutated in patients with Parkinson's disease. HtrA2 phosphorylation is decreased in brains of patients with Parkinson's disease carrying mutations in PINK1. We suggest that PINK1-dependent phosphorylation of HtrA2 might modulate its proteolytic activity, thereby contributing to an increased resistance of cells to mitochondrial stress.
17579517	Mutations in the PTEN induced putative kinase 1 (PINK1) gene cause an autosomal recessive form of Parkinson disease (PD). So far, no substrates of PINK1 have been reported, and the mechanism by which PINK1 mutations lead to neurodegeneration is unknown. Here we report the identification of TNF receptor-associated protein 1 (TRAP1), a mitochondrial molecular chaperone also known as heat shock protein 75 (Hsp75), as a cellular substrate for PINK1 kinase. PINK1 binds and colocalizes with TRAP1 in the mitochondria and phosphorylates TRAP1 both in vitro and in vivo. We show that PINK1 protects against oxidative-stress-induced cell death by suppressing cytochrome c release from mitochondria, and this protective action of PINK1 depends on its kinase activity to phosphorylate TRAP1. Moreover, we find that the ability of PINK1 to promote TRAP1 phosphorylation and cell survival is impaired by PD-linked PINK1 G309D, L347P, and W437X mutations. Our findings suggest a novel pathway by which PINK1 phosphorylates downstream effector TRAP1 to prevent oxidative-stress-induced apoptosis and implicate the dysregulation of this mitochondrial pathway in PD pathogenesis.
15785866	A G309D mutation in the PINK1 gene in a consanguineous Spanish kindred with seven siblings, three of whom are clinically affected, has recently been shown to be a cause of the PARK6 form of autosomal-recessive Parkinson's syndrome. In this family, we studied pre- and postsynaptic dopaminergic function using 123I-FP-CIT- and 123I-iodobenzamide-SPECT to determine binding to the presynaptic dopamine transporter (DAT) and postsynaptic D2 receptors respectively. All three PARK6 patients showed reduced striatal DAT binding with posterior preponderance similar to sporadic idiopathic PD, but only one patient showed significant striatal asymmetry. In two of the siblings, DAT binding was markedly increased. IBZM-SPECT was normal in both patients and sibs. Our findings indicate that 123I-FP-CIT-SPECT shows similar DAT binding in PARK6 patients compared to idiopathic Parkinson's disease. The increased DAT binding in heterozygous PARK6 carriers may be a new very early preclinical finding, but its significance is still unclear.
26162776	Mutations in PINK1 and PARKIN cause recessive, early-onset Parkinson's disease (PD). Together, these two proteins orchestrate a protective mitophagic response that ensures the safe disposal of damaged mitochondria. The kinase PINK1 phosphorylates ubiquitin (Ub) at the conserved residue S65, in addition to modifying the E3 ubiquitin ligase Parkin. The structural and functional consequences of Ub phosphorylation (pS65-Ub) have already been suggested from in vitro experiments, but its (patho-)physiological significance remains unknown. We have generated novel antibodies and assessed pS65-Ub signals in vitro and in cells, including primary neurons, under endogenous conditions. pS65-Ub is dependent on PINK1 kinase activity as confirmed in patient fibroblasts and postmortem brain samples harboring pathogenic mutations. We show that pS65-Ub is reversible and barely detectable under basal conditions, but rapidly induced upon mitochondrial stress in cells and amplified in the presence of functional Parkin. pS65-Ub accumulates in human brain during aging and disease in the form of cytoplasmic granules that partially overlap with mitochondrial, lysosomal, and total Ub markers. Additional studies are now warranted to further elucidate pS65-Ub functions and fully explore its potential for biomarker or therapeutic development.
26509433	Impairment of the autophagy-lysosome pathway is implicated with the changes in alpha-synuclein and mitochondrial dysfunction observed in Parkinson's disease (PD). Damaged mitochondria accumulate PINK1, which then recruits parkin, resulting in ubiquitination of mitochondrial proteins. These can then be bound by the autophagic proteins p62/SQSTM1 and LC3, resulting in degradation of mitochondria by mitophagy. Mutations in PINK1 and parkin genes are a cause of familial PD. We found a significant increase in the expression of p62/SQSTM1 mRNA and protein following mitophagy induction in human neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cells. p62 protein not only accumulated on mitochondria, but was also greatly increased in the cytosol. Increased p62/SQSMT1 expression was prevented in PINK1 knock-down cells, suggesting increased p62 expression was a consequence of mitophagy induction. The transcription factors Nrf2 and TFEB, which play roles in mitochondrial and lysosomal biogenesis, respectively, can regulate p62/SQSMT1. We report that both Nrf2 and TFEB translocate to the nucleus following mitophagy induction and that the increase in p62 mRNA levels was significantly impaired in cells with Nrf2 or TFEB knockdown. TFEB translocation also increased expression of itself and lysosomal proteins such as glucocerebrosidase and cathepsin D following mitophagy induction. We also report that cells with increased TFEB protein have significantly higher PGC-1alpha mRNA levels, a regulator of mitochondrial biogenesis, resulting in increased mitochondrial content. Our data suggests that TFEB is activated following mitophagy to maintain autophagy-lysosome pathway and mitochondrial biogenesis. Therefore, strategies to increase TFEB may improve both the clearance of alpha-synuclein and mitochondrial dysfunction in PD. Damaged mitochondria are degraded by the autophagy-lysosome pathway and is termed mitophagy. Following mitophagy induction, the transcription factors Nrf2 and TFEB translocate to the nucleus, inducing the transcription of genes encoding for autophagic proteins such as p62, as well as lysosomal and mitochondrial proteins. We propose that these events maintain autophagic flux, replenish lysosomes and replace mitochondria.
27089984	The ATM (ataxia telangiectasia mutated) protein has recently been proposed to play critical roles in the response to mitochondrial dysfunction by initiating mitophagy. Here, we have used ATM-proficient GM00637 cells and ATM-deficient GM05849 cells to investigate the mitophagic effect of spermidine and to elucidate the role of ATM in spermdine-induced mitophagy. Our results indicate that spermidine induces mitophagy by eliciting mitochondrial depolarization, which triggers the formation of mitophagosomes and mitolysosomes, thereby promoting the accumulation of PINK1 and translocation of Parkin to damaged mitochondria, finally leading to the decreased mitochondrial mass in GM00637 cells. However, in GM05849 cells or GM00637 cells pretreated with the ATM kinase inhibitor KU55933, the expression of full-length PINK1 and the translocation of Parkin are blocked, and the colocalization of Parkin with either LC3 or PINK1 is disrupted. These results suggest that ATM drives the initiation of the mitophagic cascade. Our study demonstrates that spermidine induces mitophagy through ATM-dependent activation of the PINK1/Parkin pathway. These findings underscore the importance of a mitophagy regulatory network of ATM and PINK1/Parkin and elucidate a novel mechanism by which ATM influences spermidine-induced mitophagy.
24896179	Cells maintain healthy mitochondria by degrading damaged mitochondria through mitophagy; defective mitophagy is linked to Parkinson's disease. Here we report that USP30, a deubiquitinase localized to mitochondria, antagonizes mitophagy driven by the ubiquitin ligase parkin (also known as PARK2) and protein kinase PINK1, which are encoded by two genes associated with Parkinson's disease. Parkin ubiquitinates and tags damaged mitochondria for clearance. Overexpression of USP30 removes ubiquitin attached by parkin onto damaged mitochondria and blocks parkin's ability to drive mitophagy, whereas reducing USP30 activity enhances mitochondrial degradation in neurons. Global ubiquitination site profiling identified multiple mitochondrial substrates oppositely regulated by parkin and USP30. Knockdown of USP30 rescues the defective mitophagy caused by pathogenic mutations in parkin and improves mitochondrial integrity in parkin- or PINK1-deficient flies. Knockdown of USP30 in dopaminergic neurons protects flies against paraquat toxicity in vivo, ameliorating defects in dopamine levels, motor function and organismal survival. Thus USP30 inhibition is potentially beneficial for Parkinson's disease by promoting mitochondrial clearance and quality control.
19229105	Mutations in PARKIN, pten-induced putative kinase 1 (PINK1), and DJ-1 are individually linked to autosomal recessive early-onset familial forms of Parkinson disease (PD). Although mutations in these genes lead to the same disease state, the functional relationships between them and how their respective disease-associated mutations cause PD are largely unknown. Here, we show that Parkin, PINK1, and DJ-1 formed a complex (termed PPD complex) to promote ubiquitination and degradation of Parkin substrates, including Parkin itself and Synphilin-1 in neuroblastoma cells and human brain lysates. Genetic ablation of either Pink1 or Dj-1 resulted in reduced ubiquitination of endogenous Parkin as well as decreased degradation and increased accumulation of aberrantly expressed Parkin substrates. Expression of PINK1 enhanced Parkin-mediated degradation of heat shock-induced misfolded protein. In contrast, PD-pathogenic Parkin and PINK1 mutations showed reduced ability to promote degradation of Parkin substrates. This study identified a functional ubiquitin E3 ligase complex consisting of PD-associated Parkin, PINK1, and DJ-1 to promote degradation of un-/misfolded proteins and suggests that their PD-pathogenic mutations impair E3 ligase activity of the complex, which may constitute a mechanism underlying PD pathogenesis.
24149988	Defective mitochondria exert deleterious effects on host cells. To manage this risk, mitochondria display several lines of quality control mechanisms: mitochondria-specific chaperones and proteases protect against misfolded proteins at the molecular level, and fission/fusion and mitophagy segregate and eliminate damage at the organelle level. An increase in unfolded proteins in mitochondria activates a mitochondrial unfolded protein response (UPR(mt)) to increase chaperone production, while the mitochondrial kinase PINK1 and the E3 ubiquitin ligase PARK2/Parkin, whose mutations cause familial Parkinson disease, remove depolarized mitochondria through mitophagy. It is unclear, however, if there is a connection between those different levels of quality control (QC). Here, we show that the expression of unfolded proteins in the matrix causes the accumulation of PINK1 on energetically healthy mitochondria, resulting in mitochondrial translocation of PARK2, mitophagy and subsequent reduction of unfolded protein load. Also, PINK1 accumulation is greatly enhanced by the knockdown of the LONP1 protease. We suggest that the accumulation of unfolded proteins in mitochondria is a physiological trigger of mitophagy.
21139416	Mitochondrial dysfunction has long been implicated in the pathogenesis of Parkinson disease (PD). Recent research has highlighted that two proteins encoded by genes linked to familial PD, PINK1 and parkin, play a role in the autophagic degradation of dysfunctional mitochondria (mitophagy). We have recently shown that mitochondrial dysfunction in PINK1-deficient human dopaminergic cells correlates with decreased autophagic flux and can be rescued by parkin expression. Further dissection of PINK1-parkin-dependent mitophagy indicates that the ubiquitination of mitofusins 1 and 2 is an early event. Here, we discuss how ubiquitination of the mitofusins might facilitate mitochondria degradation and the potential for activating mitophagy as a treatment for diseases affecting brain and muscle.
19279012	Mitochondrial dysregulation is strongly implicated in Parkinson disease. Mutations in PTEN-induced kinase 1 (PINK1) are associated with familial parkinsonism and neuropsychiatric disorders. Although overexpressed PINK1 is neuroprotective, less is known about neuronal responses to loss of PINK1 function. We found that stable knockdown of PINK1 induced mitochondrial fragmentation and autophagy in SH-SY5Y cells, which was reversed by the reintroduction of an RNA interference (RNAi)-resistant plasmid for PINK1. Moreover, stable or transient overexpression of wild-type PINK1 increased mitochondrial interconnectivity and suppressed toxin-induced autophagy/mitophagy. Mitochondrial oxidant production played an essential role in triggering mitochondrial fragmentation and autophagy in PINK1 shRNA lines. Autophagy/mitophagy served a protective role in limiting cell death, and overexpressing Parkin further enhanced this protective mitophagic response. The dominant negative Drp1 mutant inhibited both fission and mitophagy in PINK1-deficient cells. Interestingly, RNAi knockdown of autophagy proteins Atg7 and LC3/Atg8 also decreased mitochondrial fragmentation without affecting oxidative stress, suggesting active involvement of autophagy in morphologic remodeling of mitochondria for clearance. To summarize, loss of PINK1 function elicits oxidative stress and mitochondrial turnover coordinated by the autophagic and fission/fusion machineries. Furthermore, PINK1 and Parkin may cooperate through different mechanisms to maintain mitochondrial homeostasis.
25456142	Mitochondrial depolarization promotes Parkin- and PTEN-induced kinase 1 (PINK1)-dependent polyubiquitination of multiple proteins on mitochondrial outer membranes, resulting in the removal of defective mitochondria via mitophagy. Because Parkin mutations occur in Parkinson's disease, a condition associated with the death of dopaminergic neurons in the midbrain, wild-type Parkin is thought to promote neuronal survival. However, here we show that wild-type Parkin greatly sensitized toward apoptosis induced by mitochondrial depolarization but not by proapoptotic stimuli that failed to activate Parkin. Parkin-dependent apoptosis required PINK1 and was efficiently blocked by prosurvival members of the Bcl-2 family or knockdown of Bax and Bak. Upon mitochondrial depolarization, the Bcl-2 family member Mcl-1 underwent rapid Parkin- and PINK1-dependent polyubiquitination and degradation, which sensitized toward apoptosis via opening of the Bax/Bak channel. These data suggest that similar to other sensors of cell stress, such as p53, Parkin has cytoprotective (mitophagy) or cytotoxic modes (apoptosis), depending on the degree of mitochondrial damage.
23393160	Parkin E3 ubiquitin-ligase activity and its role in mitochondria homeostasis are thought to play a role in Parkinson's disease (PD). We now report that AF-6 is a novel parkin interacting protein that modulates parkin ubiquitin-ligase activity and mitochondrial roles. Parkin interacts with the AF-6 PDZ region through its C-terminus. This leads to ubiquitination of cytosolic AF-6 and its degradation by the proteasome. On the other hand, endogenous AF-6 robustly increases parkin translocation and ubiquitin-ligase activity at the mitochondria. Mitochondrial AF-6 is not a parkin substrate, but rather co-localizes with parkin and enhances mitochondria degradation through PINK1/parkin-mediated mitophagy. On the other hand, several parkin and PINK1 juvenile disease-mutants are insensitive to AF-6 effects. AF-6 is present in Lewy bodies and its soluble levels are strikingly decreased in the caudate/putamen and substantia nigra of sporadic PD patients, suggesting that decreased AF-6 levels may contribute to the accumulation of dysfunctional mitochondria in the disease. The identification of AF-6 as a positive modulator of parkin translocation to the mitochondria sheds light on the mechanisms involved in PD and underscores AF-6 as a novel target for future therapeutics.
21355049	Molecular genetics has linked mitochondrial dysfunction to the pathogenesis of Parkinson's disease by the discovery of rare, inherited mutations in gene products that associate with the mitochondria. Mutations in PTEN-induced kinase-1 (PINK1), which encodes a mitochondrial kinase, and PARKIN, encoding an E3 ubiquitin ligase, are the most frequent causes of recessive Parkinson's disease. Recent functional studies have revealed that PINK1 recruits PARKIN to mitochondria to initiate mitophagy, an important autophagic quality control mechanism that rids the cell of damaged mitochondria. PINK1 is post-translationally processed into a cleaved form whose levels are tightly regulated, although the significance of this processing is unknown. Here we demonstrate that the mitochondrial protease presenilin-associated rhomboid-like (PARL) can affect the proteolytic processing of PINK1 and that normal PINK1 localization and stability requires PARL's catalytic activity. PARL deficiency impairs PARKIN recruitment to mitochondria, suggesting PINK1's processing and localization are important in determining its interaction with PARKIN. We sequenced the PARL gene in Parkinson's disease patients and discovered a novel missense mutation in a functional domain of PARL's N-terminus. This PARL mutant is not sufficient to rescue PARKIN recruitment, suggesting that impaired mitophagy may be an underlying mechanism of disease pathogenesis in patients with PARL mutations.
26101826	Mutations in PINK1 and PARK2/Parkin are a main risk factor for familial Parkinson disease. While the physiological mechanism of their activation is unclear, these proteins have been shown in tissue culture cells to serve as a key trigger for autophagy of depolarized mitochondria. Here we show that ablation of the mitochondrial rhomboid protease PARL leads to retrograde translocation of an intermembrane space-bridging PINK1 import intermediate. Subsequently, it is rerouted to the outer membrane in order to recruit PARK2, which phenocopies mitophagy induction by uncoupling agents. Consistent with a role of this retrograde translocation mechanism in neurodegenerative disease, we show that pathogenic PINK1 mutants which are not cleaved by PARL affect PINK1 kinase activity and the ability to induce PARK2-mediated mitophagy. Altogether we suggest that PARL is an important intrinsic player in mitochondrial quality control, a system substantially impaired in Parkinson disease as indicated by reduced removal of damaged mitochondria in affected patients.
24660806	We have previously reported that the Parkinson's disease-associated kinase PINK1 (PTEN-induced putative kinase 1) is activated by mitochondrial depolarization and stimulates the Parkin E3 ligase by phosphorylating Ser65 within its Ubl (ubiquitin-like) domain. Using phosphoproteomic analysis, we identified a novel ubiquitin phosphopeptide phosphorylated at Ser65 that was enriched 14-fold in HEK (human embryonic kidney)-293 cells overexpressing wild-type PINK1 stimulated with the mitochondrial uncoupling agent CCCP (carbonyl cyanide m-chlorophenylhydrazone), to activate PINK1, compared with cells expressing kinase-inactive PINK1. Ser65 in ubiquitin lies in a similar motif to Ser65 in the Ubl domain of Parkin. Remarkably, PINK1 directly phosphorylates Ser65 of ubiquitin in vitro. We undertook a series of experiments that provide striking evidence that Ser65-phosphorylated ubiquitin (ubiquitinPhospho-Ser65) functions as a critical activator of Parkin. First, we demonstrate that a fragment of Parkin lacking the Ubl domain encompassing Ser65 (DeltaUbl-Parkin) is robustly activated by ubiquitinPhospho-Ser65, but not by non-phosphorylated ubiquitin. Secondly, we find that the isolated Parkin Ubl domain phosphorylated at Ser65 (UblPhospho-Ser65) can also activate DeltaUbl-Parkin similarly to ubiquitinPhospho-Ser65. Thirdly, we establish that ubiquitinPhospho-Ser65, but not non-phosphorylated ubiquitin or UblPhospho-Ser65, activates full-length wild-type Parkin as well as the non-phosphorylatable S65A Parkin mutant. Fourthly, we provide evidence that optimal activation of full-length Parkin E3 ligase is dependent on PINK1-mediated phosphorylation of both Parkin at Ser65 and ubiquitin at Ser65, since only mutation of both proteins at Ser65 completely abolishes Parkin activation. In conclusion, the findings of the present study reveal that PINK1 controls Parkin E3 ligase activity not only by phosphorylating Parkin at Ser65, but also by phosphorylating ubiquitin at Ser65. We propose that phosphorylation of Parkin at Ser65 serves to prime the E3 ligase enzyme for activation by ubiquitinPhospho-Ser65, suggesting that small molecules that mimic ubiquitinPhospho-Ser65 could hold promise as novel therapies for Parkinson's disease.
24121706	PINK1, a mitochondrial serine/threonine kinase, is the product of a gene mutated in an autosomal recessive form of Parkinson disease. PINK1 is constitutively degraded by an unknown mechanism and stabilized selectively on damaged mitochondria where it can recruit the E3 ligase PARK2/PARKIN to induce mitophagy. Here, we show that, under steady-state conditions, endogenous PINK1 is constitutively and rapidly degraded by E3 ubiquitin ligases UBR1, UBR2 and UBR4 through the N-end rule pathway. Following precursor import into mitochondria, PINK1 is cleaved in the transmembrane segment by a mitochondrial intramembrane protease PARL generating an N-terminal destabilizing amino acid and then retrotranslocates from mitochondria to the cytosol for N-end recognition and proteasomal degradation. Thus, sequential actions of mitochondrial import, PARL-processing, retrotranslocation and recognition by N-end rule E3 enzymes for the ubiquitin proteosomal degradation defines the rapid PINK1 turnover. PINK1 steady-state elimination by the N-end rule identifies a novel organelle to cytoplasm turnover pathway that yields a mechanism to flag damaged mitochondria for autophagic elimination.
27423393	Oxidative stress is an important pathogenesis of insulin resistance (IR) and Type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM). Studies have shown that knockdown of PTEN-induced putative kinase 1 (PINK1) causes oxidative stress and mitophagy. In db/db mice, PINK1 protein level is down-regulated. However, little is known regarding the mechanism by which PINK1 modulates IR in response to reactive oxygen species (ROS) induced stress. In our study, PINK1 expression decreased during palmitate (PA) induced IR in HepG2 cells and the hepatic tissues of high fat diet (HFD) fed mice. Additionally, free fatty acids (FFAs) could increase ROS and suppress insulin signaling pathway, which was indicated by reduced phosphorylation of protein kinase B (AKT) and glycogen synthase kinase 3beta (GSK-3beta). In addition, insulin induced glucose uptake decreased and the expression of phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase (PEPCK) and glucose-6-phosphatase (G6Pase), two key gluconeogenic enzymes, was up-regulated after PA treatment. Intriguingly, PINK1 overexpression could lead to opposite results. Moreover, PA induced hepatic IR through C-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) and extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) pathways, which were rescued by PINK1 overexpression. In summary, our results demonstrate that PINK1 promoted hepatic IR via JNK and ERK pathway in PA treated HepG2 cells, implying a novel molecular target for the therapy of diabetes.
26440884	Mitochondrial Ca(2+) overload is a critical, preceding event in neuronal damage encountered during neurodegenerative and ischemic insults. We found that loss of PTEN-induced putative kinase 1 (PINK1) function, implicated in Parkinson disease, inhibits the mitochondrial Na(+)/Ca(2+) exchanger (NCLX), leading to impaired mitochondrial Ca(2+) extrusion. NCLX activity was, however, fully rescued by activation of the protein kinase A (PKA) pathway. We further show that PKA rescues NCLX activity by phosphorylating serine 258, a putative regulatory NCLX site. Remarkably, a constitutively active phosphomimetic mutant of NCLX (NCLX(S258D)) prevents mitochondrial Ca(2+) overload and mitochondrial depolarization in PINK1 knockout neurons, thereby enhancing neuronal survival. Our results identify an mitochondrial Ca(2+) transport regulatory pathway that protects against mitochondrial Ca(2+) overload. Because mitochondrial Ca(2+) dyshomeostasis is a prominent feature of multiple disorders, the link between NCLX and PKA may offer a therapeutic target.
25899925	Mutations in PINK1 gene have been considered the second most common cause of Autosomal Recessive Parkinsonism (ARP). So far, different homozygous PINK1 mutations have been identified in different ARP patients. Abnormal hyperphosphorylation of tau leads to the loss of its biological activity. Multiple lines of evidence have demonstrated that hyperphosphorylated tau is associated with Alzheimer's disease and Parkinson's disease (PD). However, the effects of PD associated PINK1 mutations in tau phosphorylation are unknown. In this study, we investigated the effect of G309D PINK1 mutation in tau phosphorylation. Cells transfected with mutant G309D PINK1 exhibited a significant increase in the phosphorylation of tau protein at the PHF-1 (ser396/404) site. The levels of CDK5, an important activator of tau phosphorylation, did not change in mutant G309D PINK1 transfected cells, suggesting that CDK5 is not involved in tau phosphorylation induced by mutant G309D PINK1. Notably, we found that mutant G309D PINK1 significantly reduced phosphorylation of GSK3beta at serine 9, suggesting that alterations in GSK3beta activity play an essential role in mutant G309D PINK1-induced tau phosphorylation at the PHF-1 site. PP2A activity maintained consistent in mutant G309D PINK1 transfected cells, suggesting that the increased tau hyperphosphorylation is not ascribed to reduction in PP2A activity.
25791474	Recent studies showed that increased mitochondrial fission is an early event of cell death during cerebral ischemia and dynamin-related protein 1 (Drp1) plays an important role in mitochondrial fission, which may be regulated by PTEN-induced putative kinase 1 (PINK1), a mitochondrial serine/threonine-protein kinase thought to protect cells from stress-induced mitochondrial dysfunction and regulate mitochondrial fission. However, the roles of PINK1 and Drp1 in hippocampal injury caused by transient global ischemia (TGI) remain unknown. We therefore tested the hypothesis that TGI may induce PINK1 causing downregulation of Drp1 phosphorylation to enhance hippocampal neuronal survival, thus functioning as an endogenous neuroprotective mechanism. We found progressively increased PINK1 expression in the hippocampal CA1 subfield1-48 h following TGI, reaching the maximal level at 4 h. Despite lack of changes in the expression level of total Drp1 and phosphor-Drp1 at Ser637, TGI induced a time-dependent increase of Drp1 phosphorlation at Ser616 that peaked after 24 h. Notably, PINK1-siRNA increased p-Drp1(Ser616) protein level in hippocampal CA1 subfield 24 h after TGI. The PINK1 siRNA also aggravated the TGI-induced oxidative DNA damage with an increased 8-hydroxy-deoxyguanosine (8-OHdG) content in hippocampal CA1 subfield. Furthermore, PINK1 siRNA also augmented TGI-induced apoptosis as evidenced by the increased numbers of TUNEL-positive staining and enhanced DNA fragmentation. These findings indicated that PINK1 is an endogenous protective mediator vital for neuronal survival under ischemic insult through regulating Drp1 phosphorylation at Ser616.
25534921	The etiology of Parkinson's disease remains unknown. Mutations in PINK1 have provided an understanding of the molecular mechanisms of this pathology. PINK1 and Parkin are important in the dismissal of dysfunctional mitochondria. However, the role of PINK1 in the control of neuronal survival pathways is not clear. To determine the role of PINK1 in the control of the phosphatidyl inositol 3-kinase (PI3K)/Akt pathway mediated by insulin-like grow factor type 1 (IGF-1), we use a model of mesencephalic neurons (CAD cells), which were transfected with lentiviral PINK1 shRNA or control shRNA constructs. Silencing of PINK1 was determined by RT-PCR and immunoblotting; cell viability was analyzed by 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) assays; proteins of the PI3K/Akt signaling pathway were tested by immunoblotting and IGF-1 receptor, and mitochondria were examined using fluorescence microscopy. PINK1 shRNA-transfected cells showed a reduction in cell survival compared to control shRNA cells. Exposure to IGF-1 induced a rapid and high increase in the phosphorylation level of IGF-1 receptor in control shRNA-transfected cells; however, silencing of PINK1 decreases phosphorylation level of IGF-1 receptor and downstream target proteins such as Akt, GSK3-beta, IRS-1, and hexokinase. Our results further suggest that PINK1 may be regulating the PI3K/Akt neuronal survival pathway through tyrosine kinase receptors such as IGF-1 receptor.
25229693	Phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN) deleted from chromosome 10 has been implicated in the maintenance of cardiac homeostasis although the underlying mechanism(s) remains elusive. We generated a murine model of cardiomyocyte-specific knockout of PTEN to evaluate cardiac geometry and contractile function, as well as the effect of metformin on PTEN deficiency-induced cardiac anomalies, if any. Cardiac histology, autophagy and related signaling molecules were evaluated. Cardiomyocyte-specific PTEN deletion elicited cardiac hypertrophy and contractile anomalies (echocardiographic and cardiomyocyte contractile dysfunction) associated with compromised intracellular Ca(2+) handling. PTEN deletion-induced cardiac hypertrophy and contractile anomalies were associated with dampened phosphorylation of PTEN-inducible kinase 1 (Pink1) and AMPK. Interestingly, administration of AMPK activator metformin (200mg/kg/d, in drinking H2O for 4weeks) rescued against PTEN deletion-induced geometric and functional defects as well as interrupted autophagy and autophagic flux in the heart. Moreover, metformin administration partially although significantly attenuated PTEN deletion-induced accumulation of superoxide. RNA interference against Pink1 in H9C2 myoblasts overtly increased intracellular ATP levels and suppressed AMPK phosphorylation, confirming the role of AMPK as a downstream target for PTEN-Pink1. Further scrutiny revealed that activation of AMPK and autophagy using metformin and rapamycin, respectively, rescued against PTEN deletion-induced mechanical anomalies with little additive effect. These data demonstrated that cardiomyocyte-specific deletion of PTEN leads to the loss of Pink1-AMPK signaling, development of cardiac hypertrophy and contractile defect. Activation of AMPK rescued against PTEN deletion-induced cardiac anomalies associated with restoration of autophagy and autophagic flux. This article is part of a Special Issue entitled: Autophagy and protein quality control in cardiometabolic diseases.
25058378	PTEN-induced kinase-1 (PINK1) is a Ser/Thr kinase implicated in familial early-onset Parkinson's disease, and was first reported as a growth suppressor. PINK1 loss-of-function compromises both mitochondrial autophagy and oxidative phosphorylation. Here we report that PINK1 deficiency triggers hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha (HIF1alpha) stabilization in cultured Pink1(-/-) mouse embryonic fibroblasts and primary cortical neurons as well as in vivo. This effect, mediated by mitochondrial reactive oxygen species, led to the upregulation of the HIF1 target, pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase-1, which inhibits PDH activity. Furthermore, we show that HIF1alpha stimulates glycolysis in the absence of Pink1, and that the promotion of intracellular glucose metabolism by HIF1alpha stabilization is required for cell proliferation in Pink1(-/-) mice. We propose that loss of Pink1 reprograms glucose metabolism through HIF1alpha, sustaining increased cell proliferation.
24798695	Parkinson's disease (PD) is a progressive and irreversible neurodegenerative disorder coupled to selective degeneration of dopamine-producing neurons in the substantia nigra. The majority of PD incidents are sporadic, but monogenic cases account for 5-10% of cases. Mutations in PINK1 cause autosomal recessive forms of early-onset PD, and PINK1 stimulates Omi/HtrA2/PARK13 protease activity when both proteins act as neuroprotective components in the same stress pathway. Studies on PINK1 and PARK13 have concentrated on phosphorylation-dependent PINK1-mediated activation of PARK13 and mitochondrial functions, because both proteins are classically viewed as mitochondrial. Although PARK13-mediated protective mechanisms are at least in part regulated by PINK1, little is known concerning how these two proteins are regulated in different subcellular compartments or, indeed, the influence of PARK13 on PINK1 characteristics. We show that PARK13 localizes to a variety of subcellular locations in neuronal cells and that PINK1, although more restrictive, also localizes to locations other than those previously reported. We demonstrate that PARK13 accumulation leads to a concomitant accumulation of PINK1 and that the increase in PINK1 levels is compartmental specific, indicating a correlative relationship between the two proteins. Moreover, we show that PARK13 and PINK1 protein levels accumulate in response to H2 O2 and L-DOPA treatments in a subcellular fashion and that both proteins show relocation to the cytoskeleton in response to H2 O2 . This H2 O2 -mediated relocation is abolished by PARK13 overexpression. This study shows that PARK13 and PINK1 are subcellular-specific, but dynamic, proteins with a reciprocal molecular relationship providing new insight into the complexity of PD.
23585721	Parkinson's disease (PD) is the second most common neurodegenerative motor disease caused by degeneration of dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra. Because brain inflammation has been considered a risk factor for PD, we analyzed whether PTEN induced putative kinase 1 (PINK1), an autosomal recessive familial PD gene, regulates brain inflammation during injury states. Using acutely prepared cortical slices to mimic injury, we analyzed expression of the pro-inflammatory cytokines tumor necrosis factor-alpha, interleukin (IL)-1beta, and IL-6 at the mRNA and protein levels. Both mRNA and protein expression of these cytokines was higher at 6-24 h after slicing in PINK1 knockout (KO) slices compared to that in wild-type (WT) slices. In serial experiments to understand the signaling pathways that increase inflammatory responses in KO slices, we found that IkappaB degradation was enhanced but Akt phosphorylation decreased in KO slices compared to those in WT slices. In further experiments, an inhibitor of PI3K (LY294002) upstream of Akt increased expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines. Taken together, these results suggest that PINK1 deficiency enhance brain inflammation through reduced Akt activation and enhanced IkappaB degradation in response to brain injury.
23440919	PINK1 (PTEN induced putative kinase 1), a familial Parkinson's disease (PD)-related gene, is expressed in astrocytes, but little is known about its role in this cell type. Here, we found that astrocytes cultured from PINK1-knockout (KO) mice exhibit defective proliferative responses to epidermal growth factor (EGF) and fetal bovine serum. In PINK1-KO astrocytes, basal and EGF-induced p38 activation (phosphorylation) were increased whereas EGF receptor (EGFR) expression and AKT activation were decreased. p38 inhibition (SB203580) or knockdown with small interfering RNA (siRNA) rescued EGFR expression and AKT activation in PINK1-KO astrocytes. Proliferation defects in PINK1-KO astrocytes appeared to be linked to mitochondrial defects, manifesting as decreased mitochondrial mass and membrane potential, increased intracellular reactive oxygen species level, decreased glucose-uptake capacity, and decreased ATP production. Mitochondrial toxin (oligomycin) and a glucose-uptake inhibitor (phloretin) mimicked the PINK1-deficiency phenotype, decreasing astrocyte proliferation, EGFR expression and AKT activation, and increasing p38 activation. In addition, the proliferation defect in PINK1-KO astrocytes resulted in a delay in the wound healing process. Taken together, these results suggest that PINK1 deficiency causes astrocytes dysfunction, which may contribute to the development of PD due to delayed astrocytes-mediated repair of microenvironment in the brain.
23261939	Mutation in the human PTEN-induced protein kinase 1 (PINK1) gene is responsible for the second most common form of recessive Parkinson disease (PD). We have identified a single heterozygous PINK1 mutation, P209A, from a cohort of 68 patients with early onset PD. From age 31, this patient developed an asymmetric bradykinesia with rigidity that was L-DOPA responsive. An [(18)F]-fluorodopa PET scan showed reduced DOPA uptake in the bilateral basal ganglia. The H2O2-induced cell death, ROS production, and caspase-3 activation in SH-SY5Y cells were enhanced by the transfection of the PINK1 P209A mutant. The heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1) induction in response to H2O2 and MPP(+) treatment was impaired by the overexpression of the PINK1 P209A mutant. In addition, SOD2 induction after TNFalpha treatment was also inhibited by the PINK1 P209A mutation. Akt and ERK are involved in HO-1 induction after oxidative stress. The phosphorylation of Akt and ERK after exposure to H2O2 or MPP(+) was also inhibited in PINK1 P209A mutant cells compared with empty-vector-transfected cells. These results indicate a novel pathway by which the P209A defect in the PINK1 kinase domain inhibits oxidative stress-induced HO-1 and SOD2 induction, which may accelerate the neurodegeneration in PD with PINK1 defect.
22643835	Parkinson's disease (PD) is characterized by a progressive loss of dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra. The cause of neuronal death in PD is largely unknown, but several genetic loci, including PTEN-induced putative kinase 1 (PINK1), have been linked to early onset autosomal recessive forms of familial PD. PINK1 encodes a serine/threonine kinase, which phosphorylates several substrates and consequently leads to cell protection against apoptosis induced by various stresses. In addition, research has shown that inflammation largely contributes to the pathogenesis of PD, but the functional link between PINK1 and PD-linked neuroinflammation remains poorly understood. Therefore, in the present study, we investigated the functional role of PINK1 in interleukin (IL)-1beta-mediated inflammatory signaling. We show that PINK1 specifically binds to TRAF6 and TAK1, and facilitates the autodimerization and autoubiquitination of TRAF6. PINK1 also enhances the association between TRAF6 and TAK1, phosphorylates TAK1, and stimulates polyubiquitination of TAK1. Furthermore, PINK1 leads to the potentiation of IL-1beta-mediated NF-kappaB activity and cytokine production. These findings suggest that PINK1 positively regulates two key molecules, TRAF6 and TAK1, in the IL-1beta-mediated signaling pathway, consequently up-regulating their downstream inflammatory events.
22238344	The kinase MARK2/Par-1 plays key roles in several cell processes, including neurodegeneration such as Alzheimer disease by phosphorylating tau and detaching it from microtubules. In search of interaction partners of MARK2, we identified phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN)-induced kinase 1 (PINK1), which is important for the survival of neurons and whose mutations are linked to familial Parkinson disease (PD). MARK2 phosphorylated and activated the cleaved form of PINK1 (DeltaN-PINK1; amino acids 156-581). Thr-313 was the primary phosphorylation site, a residue mutated to a non-phosphorylatable form (T313M) in a frequent variant of PD. Mutation of Thr-313 to Met or Glu in PINK1 showed toxic effects with abnormal mitochondrial distribution in neurons. MARK2 and PINK1 were found to colocalize with mitochondria and regulate their transport. DeltaN-PINK1 promoted anterograde transport and increased the fraction of stationary mitochondria, whereas full-length PINK1 promoted retrograde transport. In both cases, MARK2 enhanced the effects. The results identify MARK2 as an upstream regulator of PINK1 and DeltaN-PINK1 and provide insights into the regulation of mitochondrial trafficking in neurons and neurodegeneration in PD.
22212487	The etiology of Parkinson's disease (PD) remains unknown. Mutations in several genes, including PINK1, have provided an understanding of the molecular mechanisms of this pathology. We analyzed the role of PINK1 overexpression (wild-type PINK1 or PINK1 with G309D or L347P mutations) on neurotoxicity associated with C2-ceramide exposure in CAD cells. CAD cells were transiently transfected with either PINK1 (wild type or mutated) or with empty vector and then treated with 25-muM C2-ceramide for 6 h. Cell viability and mitochondrial membrane potential were analyzed by flow cytometry, expression of Bax and Bcl-2 was determined by real-time PCR, and AKT phosphorylation was analyzed by western blot. CAD cells overexpressing wild-type PINK1 and treated with C2-ceramide showed lower percentages of depolarized mitochondria, lower expressions of Bax and higher expressions of Bcl-2 than non-transfected cells. In addition, wild-type PINK1 rescued C2-ceramide-induced inhibition of AKT phosphorylation. Overexpression of PINK1 G309D mutation caused an increase of depolarized mitochondria, a decrease of Bax and an increase in Bcl-2 expression levels. PINK1 L4347P mutation was associated with a higher drop in mitochondrial membrane potential and increased expression of Bax, with minimal variation in the expression of Bcl-2. PINK1 mutations did not result in variations of AKT phosphorylation. We suggest that by preventing mitochondrial dysfunction and reinforcing anti-apoptotic and neuronal survival pathways such as Bcl-2 and PI3K/AKT, PINK1 confers a neuroprotective effect against the neurotoxin C2-ceramide. These effects were abrogated by PINK1 mutations.
21945539	Mutations in the PARK6 gene coding for PTEN-induced kinase 1 (PINK1) cause recessive early-onset Parkinsonism. Although PINK1 and Parkin promote the degradation of depolarized mitochondria in cultured cells, little is known about changes in signaling pathways that may additionally contribute to dopamine neuron loss in recessive Parkinsonism. Accumulating evidence implicates impaired Akt cell survival signaling in sporadic and familial PD (PD). IGF-1/Akt signaling inhibits dopamine neuron loss in several animal models of PD and both IGF-1 and insulin are neuroprotective in various settings. Here, we tested whether PINK1 is required for insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1) and insulin dependent phosphorylation of Akt and the regulation of downstream Akt target proteins. Our results show that embryonic fibroblasts from PINK1-deficient mice display significantly reduced Akt phosphorylation in response to both IGF-1 and insulin. Moreover, phosphorylation of glycogen synthase kinase-3beta (GSK-3beta) and nuclear exclusion of FoxO1 are decreased in IGF-1 treated PINK1-deficient cells. In addition, phosphorylation of ribosomal protein S6 is reduced indicating decreased activity of mitochondrial target of rapamycin (mTOR) in IGF-1 treated PINK1(-/-) cells. Importantly, the protection afforded by IGF-1 against staurosporine-induced metabolic dysfunction and apoptosis is abrogated in PINK1-deficient cells. Moreover, IGF-1-induced Akt phosphorylation is impaired in primary cortical neurons from PINK1-deficient mice. Inhibition of cellular Ser/Thr phosphatases did not increase the amount of phosphorylated Akt in PINK1(-/-) cells, suggesting that components upstream of Akt phosphorylation are compromised in PINK1-deficient cells. Our studies show that PINK1 is required for optimal IGF-1 and insulin dependent Akt signal transduction, and raise the possibility that impaired IGF-1/Akt signaling is involved in PINK1-related Parkinsonism by increasing the vulnerability of dopaminergic neurons to stress-induced cell death.
21672589	Parkinson's disease (PD) is the most common neurodegenerative movement disorder. Mutations in PTEN-induced kinase 1 (PINK1) are a frequent cause of recessive PD. Autophagy, a pathway for clearance of protein aggregates or impaired organelles, is a newly identified mechanism for PD development. However, it is still unclear what molecules regulate autophagy in PINK1-silenced cells. Here we report that autophagosome formation is promoted in the early phase in response to PINK1 gene silencing by lentivirus transfer vectors expressed in mouse striatum. Reduced PP2A activity and increased phosphorylation of PP2A at Y307 (inactive form of PP2A) were observed in PINK1-knockdown dopaminergic cells and striatum tissues. Treatment with C2-ceramide (an agonist of PP2A) reduced autophagy levels in PINK1-silenced MN9D cells, which suggests that PP2A plays an important role in the PINK1-knockdown-induced autophagic pathway. Furthermore, phosphorylation of Bcl-2 at S87 increased in PINK1-silenced cells and was negatively regulated by additional treatment with C2-ceramide, which indicates that Bcl-2 may be downstream of PP2A inactivation in response to PINK1 dysfunction. Immunoprecipitation also revealed dissociation of the Bcl-2/Beclin1 complex in PINK1-silenced cells, which was reversed by additional treatment with C2-ceramide, and correlated with changes in level of autophagy and S87 phosphorylation of Bcl-2. Finally, Western blots for cleaved caspase-9 and flow cytometry results for active caspase-3 revealed that PP2A inactivation is involved in the protective effect of autophagy on PINK1-silenced cells. Our findings show that downregulation of PP2A activity in PINK1-silenced cells promotes the protective effect of autophagy through phosphorylation of Bcl-2 at S87 and blockage of the caspase pathway. These results may have implications for identifying the mechanism of PD.
21366594	Parkinson's disease (PD) is one of the most common neurodegenerative diseases. Mutation in the phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN)-induced putative kinase 1 (PINK1) gene causes an autosomal recessive form of PD. However, the etiology related to PINK1 is still not clear. Here, we examined the effect of PINK1 on heme oxygenase (HO)-1 induction in SH-SY5Y neuronal cells following H(2)O(2) or 1-methyl-4-phenylpyridinium (MPP(+)) treatment. The HO-1 induction in response to H(2)O(2) and MPP(+) treatment was impaired by the expression of recombinant PINK1 G309D mutant. PINK1 G309D mutation increased the apoptosis of SH-SY5Y cells following H(2)O(2) treatment and cell survival was rescued by the over-expression of HO-1 using adenovirus (Ad) infection. In addition, knockdown of tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated protein-1 (TRAP1), which is the substrate of PINK1 kinase, in SH-SY5Y cells also inhibited the expression of HO-1 in response to oxidative stress. The up-regulation of TRAP1 expression following H(2)O(2) treatment was inhibited by the expression of recombinant PINK1 G309D mutant. The H(2)O(2)-induced HO-1 induction was Akt- and ERK-dependent. The phosphorylation of ERK and Akt but not p38 was inhibited in cells expressing the PINK1 G309D mutant and knockdown of TRAP1. These results indicate a novel pathway by which the defect of PINK1 inhibits the oxidative stress-induced HO-1 production. Impairment of HO-1 production following oxidative stress may accelerate the dopaminergic neurodegeneration in Parkinson patients with PINK1 defect.
21177249	Accumulating evidence indicates that dysfunction of mitochondria is a common feature of Parkinson disease. Functional loss of a familial Parkinson disease-linked gene, BRPK/PINK1 (PINK1), results in deterioration of mitochondrial functions and eventual neuronal cell death. A mitochondrial chaperone protein has been shown to be a substrate of PINK1 kinase activity. In this study, we demonstrated that PINK1 has another action point in the cytoplasm. Phosphorylation of Akt at Ser-473 was enhanced by overexpression of PINK1, and the Akt activation was crucial for protection of SH-SY5Y cells from various cytotoxic agents, including oxidative stress. Enhanced Akt phosphorylation was not due to activation of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase but due to activation of mammalian target of rapamycin complex 2 (mTORC2) by PINK1. Rictor, a specific component of mTORC2, was phosphorylated by overexpression of PINK1. Furthermore, overexpression of PINK1 enhanced cell motility. These results indicate that PINK1 exerts its cytoprotective function not only in mitochondria but also in the cytoplasm through activation of mTORC2.
19780893	Dysfunction of PTEN-induced kinase-1 (PINK1) is implicated in neurodegeneration. We report here that oxygen-glucose deprivation (OGD), an in vitro insult mimicking ischemic neuron injury, resulted in a significant reduction of PINK1 protein expression in cultured cortical neurons. The decrease of PINK1 expression was blocked by the antagonists of NMDA receptors. We revealed that the overactivation of NR2B-containing NMDA receptors (NR2BRs) was responsible for the OGD-induced PINK1 reduction. The overactivated NR2BRs also inhibited the phosphorylation, but not the protein expression, of the cell survival-promoting kinase Akt after OGD insult, indicating that OGD-induced reduction of PINK1 protein is specific in the injury paradigm. We further showed that enhancing the protein expression of PINK1 antagonized OGD-induced reduction of Akt phosphorylation, suggesting that Akt may be a downstream target of PINK1 in ischemic neuron injury. Importantly, we provided evidence that both NR2BR antagonist and PINK1 over-expression protected against OGD-induced neuronal death. These results suggest that the overactivation of NR2BRs may contribute to ischemic neuron death through suppressing PINK1-dependent survival signaling. Thus, selectively antagonizing NR2BR signal pathway-induced neurotoxicity may be a potential neuroprotection strategy.
19492085	PTEN-induced novel kinase 1 (PINK1) mutations are associated with autosomal recessive parkinsonism. Previous studies have shown that PINK1 influences both mitochondrial function and morphology although it is not clearly established which of these are primary events and which are secondary. Here, we describe a novel mechanism linking mitochondrial dysfunction and alterations in mitochondrial morphology related to PINK1. Cell lines were generated by stably transducing human dopaminergic M17 cells with lentiviral constructs that increased or knocked down PINK1. As in previous studies, PINK1 deficient cells have lower mitochondrial membrane potential and are more sensitive to the toxic effects of mitochondrial complex I inhibitors. We also show that wild-type PINK1, but not recessive mutant or kinase dead versions, protects against rotenone-induced mitochondrial fragmentation whereas PINK1 deficient cells show lower mitochondrial connectivity. Expression of dynamin-related protein 1 (Drp1) exaggerates PINK1 deficiency phenotypes and Drp1 RNAi rescues them. We also show that Drp1 is dephosphorylated in PINK1 deficient cells due to activation of the calcium-dependent phosphatase calcineurin. Accordingly, the calcineurin inhibitor FK506 blocks both Drp1 dephosphorylation and loss of mitochondrial integrity in PINK1 deficient cells but does not fully rescue mitochondrial membrane potential. We propose that alterations in mitochondrial connectivity in this system are secondary to functional effects on mitochondrial membrane potential.
28148912	Cardiac homeostasis requires proper control of protein turnover. Protein degradation is principally controlled by the Ubiquitin-Proteasome System. Mule is an E3 ubiquitin ligase that regulates cellular growth, DNA repair and apoptosis to maintain normal tissue architecture. However, Mule's function in the heart has yet to be described. In a screen, we found reduced Mule expression in left ventricular samples from end-stage heart failure patients. Consequently, we generated conditional cardiac-specific Mule knockout (Mule fl/fl(y);mcm) mice. Mule ablation in adult Mule fl/fl(y);mcm mice prevented myocardial c-Myc polyubiquitination, leading to c-Myc accumulation and subsequent reduced expression of Pgc-1alpha, Pink1, and mitochondrial complex proteins. Furthermore, these mice developed spontaneous cardiac hypertrophy, left ventricular dysfunction, and early mortality. Co-deletion of Mule and c-Myc rescued this phenotype. Our data supports an indispensable role for Mule in cardiac homeostasis through the regulation of mitochondrial function via maintenance of Pgc-1alpha and Pink1 expression and persistent negative regulation of c-Myc.
21426348	Intramembrane proteolysis is a conserved mechanism that regulates a variety of cellular processes ranging from transcription control to signaling. In mitochondria, the inner membrane rhomboid protease PARL has been implicated in the control of life span and apoptosis by a so far uncharacterized mechanism. Here, we show that PARL cleaves human Pink1, which is implicated in Parkinson's disease, within its conserved membrane anchor. Mature Pink1 is then free to be released into the cytosol or the mitochondrial intermembrane space. Upon depolarization of the mitochondrial membrane potential, the canonical import of Pink1 and PARL-catalyzed processing is blocked, leading to accumulation of the Pink1 precursor. As targeting of this precursor to the outer mitochondrial membrane has been shown to trigger mitophagy, we suggest that the PARL-catalyzed removal of the Pink1 signal sequence in the canonical import pathway acts as a cellular checkpoint for mitochondrial integrity. Furthermore, we show that two Parkinson's disease-causing mutations decrease the processing of Pink1 by PARL, with attendant implications for pathogenesis.
19285945	Mutations in PINK1 cause autosomal recessive Parkinson's disease. PINK1 is a mitochondrial kinase of unknown function. We investigated calcium homeostasis and mitochondrial function in PINK1-deficient mammalian neurons. We demonstrate physiologically that PINK1 regulates calcium efflux from the mitochondria via the mitochondrial Na(+)/Ca(2+) exchanger. PINK1 deficiency causes mitochondrial accumulation of calcium, resulting in mitochondrial calcium overload. We show that calcium overload stimulates reactive oxygen species (ROS) production via NADPH oxidase. ROS production inhibits the glucose transporter, reducing substrate delivery and causing impaired respiration. We demonstrate that impaired respiration may be restored by provision of mitochondrial complex I and II substrates. Taken together, reduced mitochondrial calcium capacity and increased ROS lower the threshold of opening of the mitochondrial permeability transition pore (mPTP) such that physiological calcium stimuli become sufficient to induce mPTP opening in PINK1-deficient cells. Our findings propose a mechanism by which PINK1 dysfunction renders neurons vulnerable to cell death.
24681957	PINK1 (phosphatase and tensin homolog deleted on chromosome 10 (PTEN)-induced kinase 1), a Parkinson's disease-associated gene, was identified originally because of its induction by the tumor-suppressor PTEN. PINK1 promotes cell survival and potentially metastatic functions and protects against cell stressors including chemotherapeutic agents. However, the mechanisms underlying PINK1 function in cancer cell biology are unclear. Here, using several model systems, we show that PINK1 deletion significantly reduced cancer-associated phenotypes including cell proliferation, colony formation and invasiveness, which were restored by human PINK1 overexpression. Results show that PINK1 deletion causes major defects in cell cycle progression in immortalized mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) from PINK1(-/-) mice, and in BE(2)-M17 cells stably transduced with short hairpin RNA against PINK1. Detailed cell cycle analyses of MEF cell lines from several PINK1(-/-) mice demonstrate an increased proportion of cells in G2/M and decreased number of cells in G1 following release from nocodazole block. This was concomitant with increased double and multi-nucleated cells, a reduced ability to undergo cytokinesis and to re-enter G1, and significant alterations in cell cycle markers, including failure to increase cyclin D1, all indicative of mitotic arrest. PINK1(-/-) cells also demonstrated ineffective cell cycle exit following serum deprivation. Cell cycle defects associated with PINK1 deficiency occur at points critical for cell division, growth and stress resistance in cancer cells were rescued by ectopic expression of human PINK1 and demonstrated PINK1 kinase dependence. The importance of PINK1 for cell cycle control is further supported by results showing that cell cycle deficits induced by PINK1 deletion were linked mechanistically to aberrant mitochondrial fission and its regulation by dynamin-related protein-1 (Drp1), known to be critical for progression of mitosis. Our data indicate that PINK1 has tumor-promoting properties and demonstrates a new function for PINK1 as a regulator of the cell cycle.
23348839	Eukaryotes employ elaborate mitochondrial quality control (MQC) to maintain the function of the power-generating organelle. Parkinson's disease-associated PINK1 and Parkin actively participate in MQC. However, the signaling events involved are largely unknown. Here we show that mechanistic target of rapamycin 2 (mTORC2) and Tricornered (Trc) kinases act downstream from PINK1 to regulate MQC. Trc is phosphorylated in mTORC2-dependent and mTORC2-independent manners and is specifically localized to mitochondria in response to PINK1, which regulates mTORC2 through mitochondrial complex-I activity. Genetically, mTORC2 and Trc act upstream of Parkin. Thus, multiplex kinase signaling is acting between PINK1 and Parkin to regulate MQC, a process highly conserved in mammals.
23244239	BACKGROUND: Parkinson disease (PD) is characterized by a slow, progressive degeneration of dopaminergic neurons in the substantianigra. The cause of neuronal loss in PD is not well understood, but several genetic loci, including PTEN-induced putative kinase 1 (PINK1), have been linked to early-onset autosomal recessive forms of familial PD. Neuroinflammation greatly contributes to PD neuronal degeneration and pathogenesis. IL-1 is one of the principal cytokines that regulates various immune and inflammatory responses via the activation of the transcription factors NF-kappaB and activating protein-1. Despite the close relationship between PD and neuroinflammation, the functional roles of PD-linked genes during inflammatory processes remain poorly understood. METHODS: To explore the functional roles of PINK1 in response to IL-1beta stimulation, HEK293 cells, mouse embryonic fibroblasts derived from PINK1-null (PINK1-/-) and control (PINK1+/+) mice, and 293 IL-1RI cells stably expressing type 1 IL-1 receptor were used. Immunoprecipitation and western blot analysis were performed to detect protein-protein interaction and protein ubiquitination. To confirm the effect of PINK1 on NF-kappaB activation, NF-kappaB-dependent firefly luciferase reporter assay was conducted. RESULTS: PINK1 specifically binds two components of the IL-1-mediated signaling cascade, Toll-interacting protein (Tollip) and IL-1 receptor-associated kinase 1 (IRAK1). The association of PINK1 with Tollip, a negative regulator of IL-1beta signaling, increases upon IL-1beta stimulation, which then facilitates the dissociation of Tollip from IRAK1 as well as the assembly of the IRAK1-TNF receptor-associated factor 6 (TRAF6) complex. PINK1 also enhances Lys63-linked polyubiquitination of IRAK1, an essential modification of recruitment of NF-kappaB essential modulator and subsequent IkappaB kinase activation, and increases formation of the intermediate signalosome including IRAK1, TRAF6, and transforming growth factor-beta activated kinase 1. Furthermore, PINK1 stimulates IL-1beta-induced NF-kappaB activity via suppression of Tollip inhibitory action. CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that PINK1 upregulates IL-1beta-mediated signaling through the functional modulation of Tollip and IRAK1. These results further suggest that PINK1 stimulates the ubiquitination of proximal molecules and increases signalosome formation in the IL-1beta-mediated signaling pathway. The present study therefore supports the idea of the close relationship between neuroinflammation and PD.
24703837	Acute lung injury (ALI) is linked to mitochondrial injury, resulting in impaired cellular oxygen utilization; however, it is unknown how these events are linked on the molecular level. Cardiolipin, a mitochondrial-specific lipid, is generated by cardiolipin synthase (CLS1). Here, we show that S. aureus activates a ubiquitin E3 ligase component, Fbxo15, that is sufficient to mediate proteasomal degradation of CLS1 in epithelia, resulting in decreased cardiolipin availability and disrupted mitochondrial function. CLS1 is destabilized by the phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN)-induced putative kinase 1 (PINK1), which binds CLS1 to phosphorylate and regulates CLS1 disposal. Like Fbxo15, PINK1 interacts with and regulates levels of CLS1 through a mechanism dependent upon Thr219. S. aureus infection upregulates this Fbxo15-PINK1 pathway to impair mitochondrial integrity, and Pink1 knockout mice are less prone to S. aureus-induced ALI. Thus, ALI-associated disruption of cellular bioenergetics involves bioeffectors that utilize a phosphodegron to elicit ubiquitin-mediated disposal of a key mitochondrial enzyme.
26807733	Necroptosis as a molecular program, rather than simply incidental cell death, was established by elucidating the roles of receptor interacting protein (RIP) kinases 1 and 3, along with their downstream partner, mixed lineage kinase-like domain protein (MLKL). Previous studies suggested that phosphoglycerate mutase family member 5 (PGAM5), a mitochondrial protein that associates with RIP1/RIP3/MLKL complex, promotes necroptosis. We have generated mice deficient in the pgam5 gene and surprisingly found PGAM5-deficiency exacerbated rather than reduced necroptosis in response to multiple in vitro and in vivo necroptotic stimuli, including ischemic reperfusion injury (I/R) in the heart and brain. Electron microscopy, biochemical, and confocal analysis revealed that PGAM5 is indispensable for the process of PINK1 dependent mitophagy which antagonizes necroptosis. The loss of PGAM5/PINK1 mediated mitophagy causes the accumulation of abnormal mitochondria, leading to the overproduction of reactive oxygen species (ROS) that worsen necroptosis. Our results revise the former proposal that PGAM5 acts downstream of RIP1/RIP3 to mediate necroptosis. Instead, PGAM5 protects cells from necroptosis by independently promoting mitophagy. PGAM5 promotion of mitophagy may represent a therapeutic target for stroke, myocardial infarction and other diseases caused by oxidative damage and necroptosis.
26555609	Mutations of the PTEN-induced putative kinase 1 (PINK1) gene are a cause of autosomal recessive forms of Parkinson's disease. Recent studies have revealed that PINK1 is an essential factor for controlling mitochondrial quality, and that it protects cells from oxidative stresses. Although there has been considerable progress in the elucidation of various aspects of PINK1 protein regulation such as activation, stability and degradation, the transcriptional regulation of PINK1 mRNA under stress conditions remains unclear. In this study, we found that nuclear factor (erythroid-derived 2)-like 2 (NRF2), an antioxidant transcription factor, regulates PINK1 expression under oxidative stress conditions. Damaged mitochondria arising from stress conditions induced NRF2-dependent transcription of the PINK1 gene through production of reactive oxygen species (ROS). Either an ROS scavenger or forced expression of KEAP1, a potent inhibitory partner to NRF2, restricted PINK1 expression induced by activated NRF2. Transcriptionally up-regulated PINK1 diminished oxidative stress-associated cell death. The results indicate that PINK1 expression is positively regulated by NRF2 and that the NRF2-PINK1 signaling axis is deeply involved in cell survival.
27057733	Vocal communication deficits are common in Parkinson disease (PD). Widespread alpha-synuclein pathology is a common link between familial and sporadic PD, and recent genetic rat models based on familial genetic links increase the opportunity to explore vocalization deficits and their associated neuropathologies. Specifically, the Pink1 knockout (-/-) rat presents with early, progressive motor deficits, including significant vocal deficits, at 8 months of age. Moreover, this rat model exhibits alpha-synuclein pathology compared to age-matched non-affected wildtype (WT) controls. Aggregations are specifically dense within the periaqueductal gray (PAG), a brainstem region involved in the coordination of emotional and volitional control of vocalizations. Here, we investigated changes in gene expression within the PAG at 8 months of age in Pink1 -/- rats compared to WT. Our data demonstrate that Pink1 -/- rat mRNA expression levels of alpha-synuclein are comparable to WT. However, Pink1 -/- rats show significantly decreased levels of Atp13a2, a transmembrane lysosomal P5-type ATPase suggesting a potential mechanism for the observed abnormal aggregation. We found no difference in the expression of glucocerebrosidase (Gba) or the CASP8 and FADD-like apoptosis regulator (Cflar). Further, we show that mRNA expression levels of dopaminergic markers including Th, D1 and D2 receptor as well as GABA signaling markers including Gaba-A and glutamate decarboxylase 2 (Gad2) do not differ between genotypes. However, we found that glutamate decarboxylase 1 (Gad1) is significantly reduced in this PD model suggesting possible disruption of neurotransmission within the PAG. These results are the first to suggest the hypothesis that alpha-synuclein aggregation in this model is not a result of increased transcription, but rather a deficit in the breakdown and clearance, and that the observed vocal deficits may be related to impaired neural transmission. Altogether, these findings are consistent with the hypothesis that differences in neural substrate sensitivity contribute to the early pathogenesis of vocalizations and motivation to communicate in the Pink1 -/- rat model of PD. Our results suggest novel therapeutic pathways, including the lysosomal degradation pathway, which can be used in to further study the pathogenesis and treatment of vocal dysfunction PD.
28368777	Mitophagy is a highly specialized process to remove dysfunctional or superfluous mitochondria through the macroautophagy/autophagy pathway, aimed at protecting cells from the damage of disordered mitochondrial metabolism and apoptosis induction. PINK1, a neuroprotective protein mutated in autosomal recessive Parkinson disease, has been implicated in the activation of mitophagy by selectively accumulating on depolarized mitochondria, and promoting PARK2/Parkin translocation to them. While these steps have been characterized in depth, less is known about the process and site of autophagosome formation upon mitophagic stimuli. A previous study reported that, in starvation-induced autophagy, the proautophagic protein BECN1/Beclin1 (which we previously showed to interact with PINK1) relocalizes at specific regions of contact between the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and mitochondria called mitochondria-associated membranes (MAM), from which the autophagosome originates. Here we show that, following mitophagic stimuli, autophagosomes also form at MAM; moreover, endogenous PINK1 and BECN1 were both found to relocalize at MAM, where they promoted the enhancement of ER-mitochondria contact sites and the formation of omegasomes, that represent autophagosome precursors. PARK2 was also enhanced at MAM following mitophagy induction. However, PINK1 silencing impaired BECN1 enrichment at MAM independently of PARK2, suggesting a novel role for PINK1 in regulating mitophagy. MAM have been recently implicated in many key cellular events. In this light, the observed prevalent localization of PINK1 at MAM may well explain other neuroprotective activities of this protein, such as modulation of mitochondrial calcium levels, mitochondrial dynamics, and apoptosis.
26931463	PINK1/Parkin-mediated mitochondrial quality control (MQC) requires valosin-containing protein (VCP)-dependent Mitofusin/Marf degradation to prevent damaged organelles from fusing with the healthy mitochondrial pool, facilitating mitochondrial clearance by autophagy. Drosophila clueless (clu) was found to interact genetically with PINK1 and parkin to regulate mitochondrial clustering in germ cells. However, whether Clu acts in MQC has not been investigated. Here, we show that overexpression of Drosophila Clu complements PINK1, but not parkin, mutant muscles. Loss of clu leads to the recruitment of Parkin, VCP/p97, p62/Ref(2)P and Atg8a to depolarized swollen mitochondria. However, clearance of damaged mitochondria is impeded. This paradox is resolved by the findings that excessive mitochondrial fission or inhibition of fusion alleviates mitochondrial defects and impaired mitophagy caused by clu depletion. Furthermore, Clu is upstream of and binds to VCP in vivo and promotes VCP-dependent Marf degradation in vitro Marf accumulates in whole muscle lysates of clu-deficient flies and is destabilized upon Clu overexpression. Thus, Clu is essential for mitochondrial homeostasis and functions in concert with Parkin and VCP for Marf degradation to promote damaged mitochondrial clearance.
23933751	Compelling evidence indicates that two autosomal recessive Parkinson's disease genes, PINK1 (PARK6) and Parkin (PARK2), cooperate to mediate the autophagic clearance of damaged mitochondria (mitophagy). Mutations in the F-box domain-containing protein Fbxo7 (encoded by PARK15) also cause early-onset autosomal recessive Parkinson's disease, by an unknown mechanism. Here we show that Fbxo7 participates in mitochondrial maintenance through direct interaction with PINK1 and Parkin and acts in Parkin-mediated mitophagy. Cells with reduced Fbxo7 expression showed deficiencies in translocation of Parkin to mitochondria, ubiquitination of mitofusin 1 and mitophagy. In Drosophila, ectopic overexpression of Fbxo7 rescued loss of Parkin, supporting a functional relationship between the two proteins. Parkinson's disease-causing mutations in Fbxo7 interfered with this process, emphasizing the importance of mitochondrial dysfunction in Parkinson's disease pathogenesis.
21151574	Mutations in PINK1 and Parkin cause familial, early onset Parkinson's disease. In Drosophila melanogaster, PINK1 and Parkin mutants show similar phenotypes, such as swollen and dysfunctional mitochondria, muscle degeneration, energy depletion, and dopaminergic (DA) neuron loss. We previously showed that PINK1 and Parkin genetically interact with the mitochondrial fusion/fission pathway, and PINK1 and Parkin were recently proposed to form a mitochondrial quality control system that involves mitophagy. However, the in vivo relationships among PINK1/Parkin function, mitochondrial fission/fusion, and autophagy remain unclear; and other cellular events critical for PINK1 pathogenesis remain to be identified. Here we show that PINK1 genetically interacted with the protein translation pathway. Enhanced translation through S6K activation significantly exacerbated PINK1 mutant phenotypes, whereas reduction of translation showed suppression. Induction of autophagy by Atg1 overexpression also rescued PINK1 mutant phenotypes, even in the presence of activated S6K. Downregulation of translation and activation of autophagy were already manifested in PINK1 mutant, suggesting that they represent compensatory cellular responses to mitochondrial dysfunction caused by PINK1 inactivation, presumably serving to conserve energy. Interestingly, the enhanced PINK1 mutant phenotype in the presence of activated S6K could be fully rescued by Parkin, apparently in an autophagy-independent manner. Our results reveal complex cellular responses to PINK1 inactivation and suggest novel therapeutic strategies through manipulation of the compensatory responses.
26436374	Mutations in mitochondrial kinase PINK1 cause Parkinson disease (PD), but the submitochondrial site(s) of PINK1 action remains unclear. Here, we report that three-dimensional structured illumination microscopy (3D-SIM) enables super-resolution imaging of protein submitochondrial localization. Dual-color 3D-SIM imaging analysis revealed that PINK1 resides in the cristae membrane and intracristae space but not on the outer mitochondrial membrane (OMM) of healthy mitochondria. Under normal physiological conditions, PINK1 colocalizes with its substrate TRAP1 in the cristae membrane and intracristae space. In response to mitochondrial depolarization, PINK1, but not TRAP1, translocates to the OMM. The PINK1 translocation to the OMM of depolarized mitochondria is independent of new protein synthesis and requires combined action of PINK1 transmembrane domain and C-terminal region. We found that mitochondrial depolarization-induced PINK1 OMM translocation is required for recruitment of parkin to the OMM of damaged mitochondria. Our findings suggest that differential submitochondrial localization of PINK1 serves as a molecular switch for mediating two distinct mitochondrial signaling pathways in maintenance of mitochondrial homeostasis. Furthermore, our study provides evidence for the involvement of deregulated PINK1 submitochondrial localization in PD pathogenesis.
23472196	PTEN induced kinase 1 (PINK1) is a serine/threonine kinase in the outer membrane of mitochondria (OMM), and known as a responsible gene of Parkinson's disease (PD). The precursor of PINK1 is synthesized in the cytosol and then imported into the mitochondria via the translocase of the OMM (TOM) complex. However, a large part of PINK1 import mechanism remains unclear. In this study, we examined using cell-free system the mechanism by which PINK1 is targeted to and assembled into mitochondria. Surprisingly, the main component of the import channel, Tom40 was not necessary for PINK1 import. Furthermore, we revealed that the import receptor Tom70 is essential for PINK1 import. In addition, we observed that although PINK1 has predicted mitochondrial targeting signal, it was not processed by the mitochondrial processing peptidase. Thus, our results suggest that PINK1 is imported into mitochondria by a unique pathway that is independent of the TOM core complex but crucially depends on the import receptor Tom70.
18397367	Mutations found in PTEN-induced putative kinase 1 (PINK1), a putative mitochondrial serine/threonine kinase of unknown function, have been linked to autosomal recessive Parkinson's disease. It is suggested that mutations can cause a loss of PINK1 kinase activity and eventually lead to mitochondrial dysfunction. In this report, we examined the subcellular localization of PINK1 and the dynamic kinetics of PINK1 processing and degradation. We also identified cytosolic chaperone heat-shock protein 90 (Hsp90) as an interacting protein of PINK1 by PINK1 co-immunoprecipitation. Immunofluorescence of PINK1 protein and mitochondrial isolation show that the precursor form of PINK1 translocates to the mitochondria and is processed into two cleaved forms of PINK1, which in turn localize more to the cytosolic than mitochondrial fraction. The cleavage does not occur and the uncleaved precursor stays associated with the mitochondria when the mitochondrial membrane potential is disrupted. Metabolic labeling analyses show that the PINK1 processing is rapid and the levels of cleaved forms are tightly regulated. Furthermore, cleaved forms of PINK1 are stabilized by Hsp90 interaction as the loss of Hsp90 activity decreases PINK1 level after mitochondrial processing. Lastly, we also find that cleaved forms of PINK1 are degraded by the proteasome, which is uncommon for mitochondrial proteins. Our findings support a dual subcellular localization, implying that PINK1 can reside in the mitochondria and the cytosol. This raises intriguing functional roles that bridge these two cellular compartments.
18003639	Mutations in the ubiquitously expressed gene PTEN-induced kinase 1 (Pink1) cause autosomal recessive Parkinson's disease. Pink1 encodes a putative serine/threonine kinase with an N-terminal mitochondrial targeting sequence. The mechanism that leads to selective degeneration of dopaminergic neurons via Pink1 mutations is unknown. A full-length pre-protein (66 kDa) and an N-terminally truncated mature form (55 kDa) have been described in human brain. Here, we report that the endogenous 66 kDa and 55 kDa Pink1 forms in cultured cells are not exclusive to mitochondria but also occur in cytosolic and microsome-rich fractions. Pink1 66 kDa is the predominant isoform in cultured cells. Using unbiased analyses of immunoisolated Pink1 complexes by mass spectrometry, co-immunoprecipitation and Hsp90 inhibitor studies, we identify Pink1 as a novel Cdc37/Hsp90 client kinase. This chaperone system influences both the subcellular distribution and the 66/55 kDa protein ratio of Pink1. PD-causing Pink1 mutations decrease whereas Parkin expression increases the Pink1 66/55 kDa protein ratio, biochemically linking Pink1 and Parkin and highlighting the potential relevance of this ratio for PD pathogenesis. Finally, we document the influence of Parkin on Pink1 subcellular distribution, providing further evidence for a common pathogenic pathway in recessive PD.
23772688	Our previous study has shown that PTEN-induced novel kinase 1 (PINK1) knocking down significantly induced mitochondrial fragmentation. Although PINK1 is proved to be associated with autosomal recessive parkinsonism and its function in this chronic pathological process is widely studied, its role in acute energy crisis such as ischemic stroke is poorly known. In this study by employing an oxygen-glucose deprivation (OGD) neuronal model, we explored the function of PINK1 in cerebral ischemia. Human PINK1, two PINK1 mutants W437X and K219M, or Pink1 shRNA were transduced before OGD using lentiviral delivery. Our results showed that over-expression of wild-type PINK1 significantly ameliorated OGD induced cell death and energy disturbance including reduced ATP generation and collapse of mitochondrial membrane potential. PINK1 over-expression also reversed OGD increased mitochondrial fragmentation, and suppressed the translocation of the mitochondrial fission protein dynamin-related protein 1 (Drp1) from the cytosol to the mitochondria. Transduction of the mutant PINK1 failed to provide any protective effect, while knockdown of Pink1 significantly increased the severity of OGD-induced neuronal damage. Importantly, inhibition of Drp1 reversed the effects of knocking down Pink1 on neuronal death and ATP production in response to OGD. This study demonstrates that PINK1 prevents ischemic damage in neurons by attenuating mitochondrial translocation of Drp1, which maintains mitochondrial function and inhibits ischemia-induced mitochondrial fission. These novel findings implicate a pivotal role of PINK1 regulated mitochondrial dynamics in the pathology of ischemic stroke. In this study by employing an oxygen-glucose deprivation (OGD) neuronal model, we explored the function of PINK1 in cerebral ischemia. We indicated that PINK1 significantly ameliorated OGD induced cell death and energy disturbance including reduced ATP generation and collapse of mitochondrial membrane potential by attenuating mitochondrial translocation of Drp1, which maintains mitochondrial function and inhibits ischemia-induced mitochondrial fission.
20179104	Mitochondria display different morphologies, depending on cell type and physiological situation. In many senescent cell types, an extensive elongation of mitochondria occurs, implying that the increase of mitochondrial length in senescence could have a functional role. To test this hypothesis, human endothelial cells (HUVECs) were aged in vitro. Young HUVECs had tubular mitochondria, whereas senescent cells were characterized by long interconnected mitochondria. The change in mitochondrial morphology was caused by downregulation of the expression of Fis1 and Drp1, two proteins regulating mitochondrial fission. Targeted photodamage of mitochondria induced the formation of reactive oxygen species (ROS), which triggered mitochondrial fragmentation and loss of membrane potential in young cells, whereas senescent cells proved to be resistant. Alterations of the Fis1 and Drp1 expression levels also influenced the expression of the putative serine-threonine kinase PINK1, which is associated with the PARK6 variant of Parkinson's disease. Downregulation of PINK1 or overexpression of a PINK1 mutant (G309D) increased the sensitivity against ROS in young cells. These results indicate that there is a Drp1- and Fis1-induced, and PINK1-mediated protection mechanism in senescent cells, which, when compromised, could contribute to the age-related progression of Parkinson's disease and arteriosclerosis.
20049710	Mutations of the mitochondrial PTEN (phosphatase and tensin homologue)-induced kinase1 (PINK1) are important causes of recessive Parkinson disease (PD). Studies on loss of function and overexpression implicate PINK1 in apoptosis, abnormal mitochondrial morphology, impaired dopamine release and motor deficits. However, the fundamental mechanism underlying these various phenotypes remains to be clarified. Using fruit fly and mouse models we show that PINK1 deficiency or clinical mutations impact on the function of Complex I of the mitochondrial respiratory chain, resulting in mitochondrial depolarization and increased sensitivity to apoptotic stress in mammalian cells and tissues. In Drosophila neurons, PINK1 deficiency affects synaptic function, as the reserve pool of synaptic vesicles is not mobilized during rapid stimulation. The fundamental importance of PINK1 for energy maintenance under increased demand is further corroborated as this deficit can be rescued by adding ATP to the synapse. The clinical relevance of our observations is demonstrated by the fact that human wild type PINK1, but not PINK1 containing clinical mutations, can rescue Complex 1 deficiency. Our work suggests that Complex I deficiency underlies, at least partially, the pathogenesis of this hereditary form of PD. As Complex I dysfunction is also implicated in sporadic PD, a convergence of genetic and environmental causes of PD on a similar mitochondrial molecular mechanism appears to emerge.
24374372	PINK1 mutations cause autosomal recessive forms of Parkinson disease (PD). Previous studies suggest that the neuroprotective function of wild-type (WT) PINK1 is related to mitochondrial homeostasis. PINK1 can also localize to the cytosol; however, the cytosolic function of PINK1 has not been fully elucidated. In this study we demonstrate that the extramitochondrial PINK1 can regulate tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) expression and dopamine (DA) content in dopaminergic neurons in a PINK1 kinase activity-dependent manner. We demonstrate that overexpression of full-length (FL) WT PINK1 can downregulate TH expression and DA content in dopaminergic neurons. In contrast, overexpression of PD-linked G309D, A339T, and E231G PINK1 mutations upregulates TH and DA levels in dopaminergic neurons and increases their vulnerability to oxidative stress. Furthermore transfection of FL WT PINK1 or PINK1 fragments with the PINK1 kinase domain can inhibit TH expression, whereas kinase-dead (KD) FL PINK1 or KD PINK1 fragments upregulate TH level. Our findings highlight a potential novel function of extramitochondrial PINK1 in dopaminergic neurons. Deregulation of these functions of PINK1 may contribute to PINK1 mutation-induced dopaminergic neuron degeneration. However, deleterious effects caused by PINK1 mutations may be alleviated by iron-chelating agents and antioxidant agents with DA quinone-conjugating capacity.
28778978	Mitochondrial kinase PTEN-induced putative kinase 1 (PINK1) and E3 ubiquitin ligase Parkin function in a common pathway to regulate mitochondrial homeostasis contributing to the pathogenesis of Parkinson disease. The carboxyl terminus of Hsc70-interacting protein (CHIP) acts as a heat shock protein 70/heat shock protein 90 cochaperone to mediate protein folding or as an E3 ubiquitin ligase to target proteins for degradation. In this study, overexpression of Drosophila CHIP suppressed a range of Pink1 mutant phenotypes in flies, including abnormal wing posture, thoracic indentation, locomotion defects, muscle degeneration, and loss of dopaminergic neurons. Mitochondrial defects of Pink1 mutant, such as excessive fusion, reduced ATP content, and crista disorganization, were rescued by CHIP but not its ligase-dead mutants. Similar phenotypes and mitochondrial impairment were ameliorated in Parkin mutant flies by wild-type CHIP. Inactivation of CHIP with null fly mutants resulted in mitochondrial defects, such as reduced thoracic ATP content at 3 d old, decreased thoracic mitochondrial DNA content, and defective mitochondrial morphology at 60 d old. CHIP mutants did not exacerbate the phenotypes of Pink1 mutant flies but markedly shortened the life span of Parkin mutant flies. These results indicate that CHIP is involved in mitochondrial integrity and may act downstream of Pink1 in parallel with Parkin.-Chen, J., Xue, J., Ruan, J., Zhao, J., Tang, B., Duan, R. Drosophila CHIP protects against mitochondrial dysfunction by acting downstream of Pink1 in parallel with Parkin.
28137779	PINK1 is mutated in Parkinson's disease (PD), and mutations cause mitochondrial defects that include inefficient electron transport between complex I and ubiquinone. Neurodegeneration is also connected to changes in lipid homeostasis, but how these are related to PINK1-induced mitochondrial dysfunction is unknown. Based on an unbiased genetic screen, we found that partial genetic and pharmacological inhibition of fatty acid synthase (FASN) suppresses toxicity induced by PINK1 deficiency in flies, mouse cells, patient-derived fibroblasts, and induced pluripotent stem cell-derived dopaminergic neurons. Lower FASN activity in PINK1 mutants decreases palmitate levels and increases the levels of cardiolipin (CL), a mitochondrial inner membrane-specific lipid. Direct supplementation of CL to isolated mitochondria not only rescues the PINK1-induced complex I defects but also rescues the inefficient electron transfer between complex I and ubiquinone in specific mutants. Our data indicate that genetic or pharmacologic inhibition of FASN to increase CL levels bypasses the enzymatic defects at complex I in a PD model.
28122242	Mutations in PTEN-induced putative kinase 1 (PINK1) and parkin cause autosomal-recessive Parkinson's disease through a common pathway involving mitochondrial quality control. Parkin inactivation leads to accumulation of the parkin interacting substrate (PARIS, ZNF746) that plays an important role in dopamine cell loss through repression of proliferator-activated receptor gamma coactivator-1-alpha (PGC-1alpha) promoter activity. Here, we show that PARIS links PINK1 and parkin in a common pathway that regulates dopaminergic neuron survival. PINK1 interacts with and phosphorylates serines 322 and 613 of PARIS to control its ubiquitination and clearance by parkin. PINK1 phosphorylation of PARIS alleviates PARIS toxicity, as well as repression of PGC-1alpha promoter activity. Conditional knockdown of PINK1 in adult mouse brains leads to a progressive loss of dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra that is dependent on PARIS. Altogether, these results uncover a function of PINK1 to direct parkin-PARIS-regulated PGC-1alpha expression and dopaminergic neuronal survival.
28060722	The molecular mechanisms underlying the anti-breast cancer effects of polyphyllin I, a natural compound extracted from Paris polyphylla rhizomes, are not fully understood. In the present study, we found that polyphyllin I induces mitochondrial translocation of DRP1 by dephosphorylating DRP1 at Ser637, leading to mitochondrial fission, cytochrome c release from mitochondria into the cytosol and, ultimately apoptosis. Polyphyllin I also increased the stabilization of full-length PINK1 at the mitochondrial surface, leading to the recruitment of PARK2, P62, ubiquitin, and LC3B-II to mitochondria and culminating in mitophagy. PINK1 knockdown markedly suppressed polyphyllin I-induced mitophagy and enhanced polyphyllin I-induced, DRP1-dependent mitochondrial fission and apoptosis. Furthermore, suppression of DRP1 by mdivi-1 or shRNA inhibited PINK1 knockdown/polyphyllin I-induced mitochondrial fragmentation and apoptosis, suggesting that PINK1 depletion leads to excessive fission and, subsequently, mitochondrial fragmentation. An in vivo study confirmed that polyphyllin I greatly inhibited tumor growth and induced apoptosis in MDA-MB-231 xenografts, and these effects were enhanced by PINK1 knockdown. These data describe the mechanism by which PINK1 contributes to polyphyllin I-induced mitophagy and apoptosis and suggest that polyphyllin I may be an effective drug for breast cancer treatment.
