Domain analyses of Usher syndrome causing Clarin-1 and GPR98 protein models
Usher syndrome is an autosomal recessive disorder that causes hearing loss, Retinitis Pigmentosa (RP) and vestibular dysfunction.
It is clinically and genetically heterogeneous disorder which is clinically divided into three types i.e. type I, type II and type III. To
date, there are about twelve loci and ten identified genes which are associated with Usher syndrome. A mutation in any of these
genes e.g. CDH23, CLRN1, GPR98, MYO7A, PCDH15, USH1C, USH1G, USH2A and DFNB31 can result in Usher syndrome or
non-syndromic deafness. These genes provide instructions for making proteins that play important roles in normal hearing,
balance and vision. Studies have shown that protein structures of only seven genes have been determined experimentally and there
are still three genes whose structures are unavailable. These genes are Clarin-1, GPR98 and Usherin. In the absence of an
experimentally determined structure, homology modeling and threading often provide a useful 3D model of a protein. Therefore in
the current study Clarin-1 and GPR98 proteins have been analyzed for signal peptide, domains and motifs. Clarin-1 protein was
found to be without any signal peptide and consists of prokar lipoprotein domain. Clarin-1 is classified within claudin 2 super
family and consists of twelve motifs. Whereas, GPR98 has a 29 amino acids long signal peptide and classified within GPCR family
2 having Concanavalin A-like lectin/glucanase superfamily. It was found to be consists of GPS and G protein receptor F2 domains
and twenty nine motifs. Their 3D structures have been predicted using I-TASSER server. The model of Clarin-1 showed only _-helix_
but no beta sheets while model of GPR98 showed both _-helix_ and  sheets. The predicted structures were then evaluated and
validated by MolProbity and Ramachandran plot. The evaluation of the predicted structures showed 78.9% residues of Clarin-1
and 78.9% residues of GPR98 within favored regions. The findings of present study has resulted in the three dimensional structure
prediction and conserved domain analysis which will be quite beneficial in better understanding of molecular components,
protein-protein interaction, clinical heterogeneity and pathophysiology of Usher syndrome. 
Usher syndrome (USH) is an autosomal recessive disorder that
causes deafness (hearing loss), blindness (retinis pigmentosa)
and vestibular areflexia (dysfunction). It was discovered in 1858
by Von Graefe. He found hearing and vision loss and vestibular
impairment in the persons suffering from Usher syndrome.
Later on a British ophthalmologist found that this syndrome is
inheritable []. Mutations in different genes or different
mutations in the same genes produce same or clinically
heterogeneous features in affected individuals. On the basis of
retinal degeneration level, hearing impairment and presence or
absence of vestibular dysfunction; severity of Usher syndrome
can be determined. Chales Usher had initially put Usher
Syndrome in two categories []. Currently, this syndrome is
clinically divided into three types i.e. type I, type II and type III.
Type I is most severe form in which children are deaf at birth
with severe balance and vision problems, usually loss of
peripheral vision followed by continuous retinal degeneration
resulting in complete blindness in the second or third decade of
life. Usher syndrome type I has genetically six subtypes i.e.
USHIB-USHIG. MYO7A is the one of the most common genes
of Usher syndrome type I that causes USHIB. MYO7A is
responsible for organelle transport and clearance of optin from
cilium []. Diagnosis of the disease can be confirmed by
mutational analysis of the reported genes and
electroretinography (ERG) of affected individuals []. By the analysis of USA and UK population, 27 different
mutations have been identified where 19 mutations are new
and remaining are missense mutations. 35-39% is found in
USHIB & USHID, 11% in USHIF, while 7% in USHIC and
USHIG []. In Pakistani population, data collection over more
than 400 families shows that 10% of the children are suffering
from USH1. Half of them are linked with the subtype USHIB
and approximately 30% are linked with USHID, while
remaining is equally divided with USHIC and USHIF. Relative
abundance in the sampling of Pakistani deaf children shows
42.9% of the children are affected with USH1 and 4.1% with
USH2 []. Usher syndrome type II (USHIIA-USHIIC) is less severe than
type I. Children born with type II have moderate to severe
hearing loss and normal balance. Usher syndrome type III
(USHIIIA) is less severe than type I and II. Persons with type III
may develop progressive hearing loss and visual problem but
have normal vestibular function. So far, 12 loci and 10 genes
have been identified out of which six (MYO7A, CDH23,
PCDH15, USH1E, USHIC and USHIG) are responsible for
Usher type I, three (USH2A, GPR98 and DFNB31) for type II
and only one (USH3A) for Usher type III [, ]. Mutations in MYO7A cause USHIB; USH1C & USH1D are
caused by mutations in USH1C and CDH23, respectively; while
USHIF and non-syndromic deafness are caused by mutations in
PCDH15. USHIB encodes Myosin VIIA that acts as motor
protein, USHID encodes cadherin 23 and USHIF encodes
photocadherin15, these are two cell-cell adhesion proteins.
USHIC encodes harmonin and USHIG encodes SANS, both are
scaffold proteins. These proteins create a network with each
other by binding to PZD domain in USHIC harmonin protein
and its scaffold function is carried out with SANS protein. In
USH type 2, the USH2A encodes a protein named as Usherin
and USH2C encodes G-protein, both are trans-membrane
proteins. The proteins of USH type II are also a part of protein
network and involved in protein interactions. They also serve
as a candidate for USH2B. USH type I and type II proteins form
interactions in the protein network that shows the
pathophysiological pathway in USH. Studies have shown that protein structures of only seven USH
genes have been determined experimentally and there are still
three genes whose protein structures are unavailable. These
genes are Clarin-1 (USH3A), GPR98 (USH2C) and Usherin
(USH2A). In the absence of an experimentally determined
structure, comparative or homology modeling and threading
often provide a useful 3D model for a protein that is related to
at least one protein structure. Therefore in the current study
Clarin-1 and GPR98 proteins have been selected for _in-silico_
analysis and 3D structure prediction. The current findings will
help in the determination of protein-protein interactions which
will be beneficial in understanding the molecular basis of both
auditory and photo-transduction. Amino acid sequences of the Usher genes Clarin-1 (GeneBank
Accession # NG_009168) and GPR98 (GeneBank Accession #
NG_007083) were obtained from Universal Protein Resource
[]. Usher syndrome proteins may contain signal peptide in their
sequence. To find the signal peptide, SignalP-4.1 Server was
used. The SignalP-4.1 server determines the presence and area
of signal-peptide cleavage-sites in amino acid sequence of
proteins []. A protein sequence with a precise 3D structure and a precise
function always contains a domain. Domains of the Usher
proteins under study were analyzed and identified by various
databases; Prosite database using ScanProsite at Expasy,
InterPro database using InterProScan at EBI, Pfam database
using Search Pfam at Sanger Institute [] and with the help
of Conserved Domain Database using CDD search at NCBI
[]. The existence of a specific motif reveals particular functions of
the proteins. The conserved functional motifs in the protein
sequence of Usher proteins under study were found by Motif
Search Server using Prosite pattern, Prosite profile, PRODOM
and PRINTS databases []. I-TASSER server was used for protein-structure predictions.
For protein structure and function prediction by I-TASSER, the
server was accessed through the link []. The
protein sequences were submitted in the query box or the files
were uploaded through local computer in FASTA format. The
results received via email were analyzed further. To view the structures in atomic coordinate files with pdb
extensions, to enable the manipulation of the image and to
visualize the molecules with different perspectives, molecular
visualization tool is needed. The PDB files obtained from ITASSER
server were visualized with UCSC CHIMERA []. After the prediction of 3D structures, the predicted models
were evaluated and validated through MolProbity and
Ramachandran Plot [] for their sterio-chemical properties.
MolProbity server computed Ramachandarn values for
dihedral angles, poor rotameric conformations, C deviation,
bad angles and bond lengths of all the residues. In the current study the amino acid sequence of Clarin-1
(GenBank Accession # NG_009168) and GPR98 (GenBank
Accession # NG_007083) were retrieved from UniProt
(Accession no. P58418 and Q8WXG9, respectively). Before using the retrieved protein sequences for homology
modeling, the sequences were analyzed for the presence of
signal peptide through SignalP-4.1 server. A signal peptide is a
short length peptide chain that helps in the transportation of
protein inside and outside of the cell. This short chain is
eliminated during maturation of the protein. Therefore, the
signal amino acid sequence should be eliminated from primary
sequence. The elimination of signal peptide confirms the
structure prediction according to the original structure of the
protein. According to Signal-HMM result of Clarin-1, the
maximum cleavage (max. C) site probability was 0.500 at 28th
amino acid and there was no signal peptide in the protein.
Whereas, in GPR98 sequence analysis Signal-HMM results
showed that the maximum cleavage (max. C) site probability of
the GPR98 signal peptide was 0.594 at 30th amino acid and a
signal peptide of 29 amino acids was present (the sequence of
which was removed before proceeding further). With the help of Prosite, Pfam, InterProScan and CDD search, a
number of domain hits were found within the proteins being
analyzed. Prosite results showed the existence of prokar
lipoprotein domain within Clarin-1 and presence of two
domains, GPS and G protein receptor F2 within GPR98. Pfam
and InterProScan results showed that Clarin-1 is classified
within claudin 2 super family that play role in sterocilia and
photoreceptor cell synapses. There were four transmembrane
domains in Clarin-1 which play role in photoreceptor cell
synapses, pathophysiological pathway and hair cell
development. While, in GPR98 the InterProScan results also
showed the presence of GPS domain. The protein is classified
within GPCR family 2 and Concanavalin A-like
lectin/glucanase superfamily. The Pfam analysis showed the
presence of three domains Calx-Beta, Laminin G3 and EPTP
families within GPR98 protein. Additionally in GPR98, seven
PZD binding domain hits were found that help in the formation
of hair cell stereocilia []. The study of Clarin-1 protein by
means of Conserved Domain Database (CDD) Search tool
indicated that there is no conserved domain within this protein
while twenty five Calx-Beta domains within GPR98 were
observed. Motifs are amino acid residues within a domain that occur
consistently and are responsible to carry out the specific
function of the particular protein. Multiple short conserved
motifs drawn from sequence alignments may carry the
Fingerprints. Fingerprints are very helpful in evolutionary
studies and in assigning a recently sequenced protein to a
particular family. In PRINTS and PROSITE, fingerprints are
created from gapped alignments, but in case of BLOCKS from
un-gapped alignments. From PROSITE and PRINTS,
fingerprints may consist of numerous motifs, thats why these
are more flexible and strong as compared to a single PROSITE
motif. It is helpful to verify similar data from more than one
database and then compare their results. Therefore, fingerprints
in the query sequences were found by MOTIF search server
using PROSITE, PRODOM and PRINTS. Results of Clarin-1
showed 12 motifs with prokar lipoprotein being the most
prominent in PRODOM and Rhodopsin-like GPCR superfamily
signature in PRINTS; while in GPR98, twenty nine motifs were
observed. GPR98 also contains several repeated motifs
including some calcium binding Calx-Beta repeats and seven
copies of an epitempin repeats. The tertiary structures of Clarin-1 and GPR98 proteins were
predicted using I-TASSER server. In case of Clarin-1, homology
modeling through I-TASSER was done using template (PDB ID:
4DR0A) which has 27% homology with the Clarin-1. The model
of Clarin-1 showed only _-helix_ but no beta sheets in it. Similarly the same procedure was repeated with
GPR98 by using a template (PDB ID: 4IGlA; having 22%
similarity) and predicted model of GPR98 showed both _-helix_
and  sheets. Both predicted structures were then statistically evaluated and
validated as shown in (see supplementary material).
Validation and evaluation of 3D structure of proteins,
complexes and nucleic acid can be done automatically and
efficiently by MolProbity []. When  and  angles of the
amino acids of a particular protein are plotted against each
other, the resulting diagram is called a Ramachandran plot. It is basically a technique to visualize dihedral angles
 against  of all residues, which is the back bone of protein
structure. Clarin-1 and GPR98 showed same percentage of
residues in favored region when evaluated by Ramachandran
plot. Clarin-1 showed 78.9% of its residues in favored region.
Similarly, the predicted model of GPR98 also had 78.9%
residues in favored region as shown in (see
supplementary material). Advances in molecular genetics techniques have revolutionized
the identification of new mutations in various genes but usually
the effect of these new mutations upon mutated protein
structure and function, protein-protein interactions, onset and
severity of disease is not focused. The present manuscript
answers this fundamental question. The signal peptide analysis
showed the presence of 29 amino acid long signal peptide in
GPR98, whereas no signal peptide was observed in Clarin-1.
Both proteins consist of a number of conserved domains which
play important role in sterocilia development and
photoreceptor cell synapses. Clarin-1 showed twelve motifs
with prokar lipoprotein being the most prominent while in
GPR98 twenty nine motifs were observed including calcium
binding Calx-Beta repeats. The Clarin-1 predicted structure
showed only _-helix_ while in GPR98 structure both _-helix_ and 
sheets were present. The study will help to better understand
the pathophysiology of disease, impact of allele variants on
protein and to devise new tools for therapeutic intervention. 