Single-channel Properties of Human NaV1.1 and Mechanism of Channel Dysfunction in _SCN1A_-associated Epilepsy
Mutations in genes encoding neuronal voltage-gated sodium channel subunits have been linked to inherited forms of epilepsy. The majority of mutations (>100) associated with generalized epilepsy with febrile seizures plus (GEFS+) and severe myoclonic epilepsy of infancy (SMEI) occur in _SCN1A_ encoding the NaV1.1 neuronal sodium channel -subunit. Previous studies demonstrated functional heterogeneity among mutant SCN1A channels, revealing a complex relationship between clinical and biophysical phenotypes. To further understand the mechanisms responsible for mutant SCN1A behavior, we performed a comprehensive analysis of the single-channel properties of heterologously expressed recombinant WT-SCN1A channels. Based on these data, we then determined the mechanisms for dysfunction of two GEFS+-associated mutations (R1648H, R1657C) both affecting the S4 segment of domain 4. WT-SCN1A has a slope conductance (17 pS) similar to channels found in native mammalian neurons. The mean open time is 0.3 ms in the 30 to 10 mV range. The R1648H mutant, previously shown to display persistent sodium current in whole-cell recordings, exhibited similar slope conductance but had an increased probability of late reopening and a subfraction of channels with prolonged open times. We did not observe bursting behavior and found no evidence for a gating mode shift to explain the increased persistent current caused by R1648H. Cells expressing R1657C exhibited conductance, open probability, mean open time, and latency to first opening similar to WT channels but reduced whole-cell current density, suggesting decreased number of functional channels at the plasma membrane. In summary, our findings define single-channel properties for WT-SCN1A, detail the functional phenotypes for two human epilepsy-associated sodium channel mutants, and clarify the mechanism for increased persistent sodium current induced by the R1648H allele. 
Voltage-gated sodium channels are integral membrane proteins essential for the generation and propagation of action potentials in excitable tissues. Mutations in genes encoding sodium channel subunits have been associated with inherited disorders of membrane excitability manifesting as abnormal skeletal muscle contraction, cardiac arrhythmias, or epilepsy. Several studies have discerned important features of sodium channel dysfunction that underlie these disorders, and provided insight into their pathophysiology and defining genotypephenotype correlations. Mutations in genes encoding neuronal voltage-gated sodium channel  subunits (_SCN1A_ and _SCN2A_) and the accessory 1 subunit (_SCN1B_) have been linked to inherited forms of epilepsy (; ; ; ; ;. These include the syndromes of generalized epilepsy with febrile seizures plus (GEFS+) and severe myoclonic epilepsy of infancy (SMEI). The majority of the mutations (>100) associated with these inherited epilepsies occur in the _SCN1A_-encoded NaV1.1 neuronal sodium channel -subunit. We and others have examined the functional consequences of _SCN1A_ mutations using heterologous expression of recombinant human or rodent sodium channels (, ; ;, ;. Available evidence indicates that there is considerable functional heterogeneity among mutant SCN1A channels associated with distinct epileptic syndromes, revealing a complex relationship among clinical and biophysical phenotypes. As an illustration of the functional heterogeneity observed for _SCN1A_ mutations, we previously characterized the properties of whole-cell currents generated by heterologous expression of wild-type (WT) SCN1A or the GEFS+-associated missense mutations R1648H and R1657C. Both mutations affect highly conserved, positively charged residues in the voltage-sensing S4 segment of the fourth domain; R1648H is in the middle of S4, while R1657C is the innermost positively charged residue in this segment. The most prominent effect of R1648H is an apparent defect in fast inactivation leading to increased persistent sodium current (;. The main functional defects exhibited by R1657C are reduced current density and a depolarizing shift in the voltage dependence of activation. Our previous evaluation of R1648H single-channel behavior suggested late channel reopening as a potential mechanism for persistent current. However, those studies examined membrane patches with >10 channels per patch and at only one voltage, potentially concealing other functional defects. To better understand the mechanisms responsible for mutant SCN1A behavior, we determined the single-channel properties of WT-SCN1A and more fully characterized the biophysical phenotypes caused by R1648H and R1657C mutations. WT-SCN1A exhibits a slope conductance of 17 pS, a brief (0.3 ms) mean open time that it is voltage independent in the 30 to 10 mV range, and a voltage-dependent latency to first opening. We also demonstrated that R1648H single channels exhibit a marked increase in the probability of late reopening with a fraction of channels having significantly longer open times. In contrast to previous suggestions, our data do not support a gating mode shift as the explanation for increased persistent current caused by this mutation. In addition, the single-channel conductance, peak open probability, and time to first opening measured for R1657C channels are similar to those of wild-type channels. Thus, the reduction in current density previously observed with the R1657C mutation is most likely due to a decrease in the number of active channels at the plasma membrane. These observations will enable development of advanced computational modeling based on both whole-cell and single-channel data to predict the impact of sodium channel dysfunction on neuronal excitability, and serve as a basis for comparison of other mutations similarly characterized. All experiments were conducted using tsA201 cells (HEK-293 cells stably transfected with SV40 large T antigen) grown at 37C with 5% CO2 in Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium (DMEM) supplemented with 10% FBS (ATLANTA Biologicals), 2 mM l-glutamine, and penicillin (50 U/ml)-streptomycin (50 g/ml). Only cells from passage number <13 were used. Unless otherwise stated, all tissue culture media was obtained from Life Technologies, Inc. Full-length wild-type and mutant SCN1A cDNAs were generated and engineered in the mammalian expression vector pCMV-Script (Stratagene) as previously described (;. Plasmids encoding the human voltage-gated sodium channel accessory subunits h1 or h2 in vectors containing the marker genes CD8 (pCD8-IRES-h1) or GFP (pGFP-IRES-h2) were also used in this study. Expression of SCN1A, h1, and h2 subunits was achieved by transient plasmid transfection using Superfect Transfection Reagent (QIAGEN). For whole-cell experiments, 6 g of total DNA was transfected (SCN1A:h1:h2 mass ratio was 10:1:1). For WT-SCN1A and R1648H single-channel experiments, we transfected 2.2 g of total DNA (1.2 -subunit, 0.5 h1, and 0.5 h2) to attain outside-out patches with relatively few channels. For R1657C, which expresses less well, 2.2 g of -subunit plasmid DNA was transfected in order to consistently observe single-channel activity. Cells were incubated for 48 h as described above after transfection before their use in electrophysiology experiments. Transfected cells were dissociated by brief exposure to trypsin/EDTA, resuspended in supplemented DMEM medium, plated on glass coverslips pretreated with CELL-TAK cell and tissue adhesive (Collaborative Biomedical Products) and allowed to recover for 2 h at 37C in 5% CO2. Polystyrene microbeads precoated with anti-CD8 antibody (Dynabeads M-450 CD 8; Dynal) were added and only cells positive for both CD8 antigen (i.e., h1 expression) and GFP fluorescence (i.e., h2 expression) were studied. Coverslips were placed into a recording chamber on the stage of an inverted microscope with epifluorescence capability. After allowing the cells to equilibrate for 10 min in bath solution, sodium currents were recorded in the whole-cell or excised, outside-out patch configuration of the patch-clamp technique () using an Axopatch 200B series amplifier (Axon Instruments). Bath solution contained (in mM) 145 NaCl, 4 KCl, 1.8 CaCl2, 1 MgCl2, 10 HEPES, pH 7.35, 310 mOsm/kg. The composition of the pipette solution was (in mM) 10 NaF, 110 CsF, 20 CsCl, 2 EGTA, 10 HEPES, pH 7.35, 310 mOsm/kg. Osmolarity and pH values were adjusted with sucrose and NaOH, respectively. Patch pipettes were pulled from thick-wall borosilicate glass (World Precision Instruments, Inc.) with a multistage P-97 Flaming-Brown micropipette puller (Sutter Instruments Co.) and fire polished with a Micro Forge MF 830 (Narishige). Pipette resistance was 2 M for whole-cell experiments and 6 M for outside-out experiments. Single-channel recording pipettes were coated with Sylgard 184 (Dow Corning). Agar bridges (2% in bath solution) served as reference electrodes. Whole-cell currents were recorded as previously described (, ;. Single-channel currents were filtered at 5 kHz and acquired at 20 kHz. Filter rise time was 66 s (4 pole Bessel filter), and openings shorter than 0.1 ms were not included in the analysis. Pulse generation and data collection were done using Clampex 8.1 (Axon Instruments, Inc.). Currents from excised outside-out patches were recorded only from cells exhibiting whole-cell sodium currents in the range 600700 pA at a holding potential of 0 mV (no series resistance compensation). Channel behavior was examined over a range of test potentials (typically 30 to +10 mV) from a holding potential of 100 mV. Each voltage step was followed by a 25 s recovery period at 100 mV. All experiments were performed at room temperature. The number of channels in the patch was determined as the maximum number of channels seen open at the same time in all pulses for all voltages tested. Multichannel patches were used only to obtain ensemble-average currents, some of these patches had multiple openings and we did not determine the exact number of channels per patch. Data analysis and presentation were performed with Clampfit 8.1, Fetchan and Pstat 6.0.5 (Axon Instruments, Inc.), SigmaPlot 2000 (SPSS Science), and Origin 7.0 (OriginLab) software. Whole-cell conductance was calculated using the formula _G_Na = _I_Na /(_V_  _E_rev) where Erev is the Na+ estimated reversal potential and normalized to the maximal conductance between 80 and +20 mV. The voltage dependence of activation was obtained with the Boltzmann function: _G_ = _1_/(_1_ + _exp_[(_V_  _V_1/2)/_k_]. Ensemble-average currents were generated with Clampfit and fitted with a double exponential function, _f_(_t_) = _A_1  _exp_(_t_/__1) + _A_2  _exp_(_t_/__2) + _C_. For single-channel recordings, linear leak and capacitive transients were subtracted using the average of blank traces, and no corrections were made for missed events. The first bin in open time histograms was not used for curve fitting. Single-channel traces were filtered at 2 kHz for display purposes. Data are represented as means  SEM, with the number of experiments (outside-out patches) provided in the figure legends. Statistical significance was determined using unpaired Student's _t_ test and P < 0.05 was considered statistically significant. Currently there is no information regarding the single-channel biophysical properties of SCN1A. To further understand the function of SCN1A and elucidate the mechanisms responsible for mutant SCN1A behavior, we examined single-channel activities using the excised, outside-out configuration of the patch clamp technique. We initially characterized the single-channel behavior of heterologously expressed human WT-SCN1A for later comparison with mutants. Single-channel activity was generally studied over the voltage range of 30 to +10 mV. In some multichannel patches, we were also able to measure channel activity at 40 and +20 mV. In all experiments, wild-type and mutant SCN1A channels were coexpressed with h1 and h2. illustrates single-channel records obtained from an excised outside-out patch containing WT-SCN1A channels. These records exhibit multiple simultaneous openings consistent with five channels in the patch. Ensemble averages computed from 100 records (lowest trace in each panel) qualitatively resemble whole-cell currents measured at the same test potentials from cells expressing WT-SCN1A. The decay phase was best fitted with a double exponential function that yielded two time constants (designated fast and slow). In C, we compare the voltage dependence of time constants for fast inactivation obtained from ensemble average currents with those previously calculated for whole-cell currents. Overall, the values obtained from the single-channel and whole-cell data compare well. For example, the time constants derived from single-channel data at 10 mV were 0.48  0.08 ms and 2.37  0.35 ms for fast and slow time constants (_n_ = 12), respectively. These values are not different than those obtained from whole-cell recordings at the same voltage (0.47  0.02 ms and 3.81  0.51 ms for fast and slow components, respectively; _n_ = 8). To compare data from patches containing dissimilar numbers of channels, we normalized the peak current at each voltage to the current measured at 20 mV. The general currentvoltage relationship for outside-out patches expressing WT-SCN1A channels ( D) resembles our previously described whole-cell data (, ;. However, peak activation in outside-out patches occurred at 20 mV, a hyperpolarization shift of 10 mV when compared with whole-cell current measurements. A possible explanation for this discrepancy is the longer time required to complete the ensemble-average currentvoltage relationships in single-channel experiments (2030 min) as compared with whole-cell currentvoltage relationships (10 min). Previous experiments have shown a time-dependent hyperpolarization shift of the voltage dependence of Na+ kinetics (;. To test this possibility, we recorded whole-cell currents from tsA201 cells transfected with WT-SCN1A at early (1012 min) and later (2327 min) time points after establishing the whole-cell configuration. shows whole-cell currentvoltage relationship and voltage dependence of activation obtained from these early and late recordings. Both measurements displayed a time-dependent hyperpolarization shift, which can explain the 10 mV shift in peak activation observed in outside-out patches. Thus, our initial data indicate that single-channel observations made under these conditions correlate well with expression of WT-SCN1A. For more detailed analyses of single-channel events, we analyzed recordings containing 5 channels per patch. illustrates single-channel records measured at 0 and 10 mV from an excised outside-out patch containing only two channels. The single-channel amplitude was measured by fitting all-points amplitude histograms with Gaussian curves ( C). Single-channel currents were plotted against the test potential and the slope conductance was obtained by linear regression ( D). The calculated slope conductance for WT-SCN1A determined between 30 and +10 mV was 17 pS (_n_  4). This conductance value falls within the range (1620 pS) reported for native sodium channels in rat (; ; ; ) and human () neurons. The single channel conductance of SCN1A is also similar to SCN4A expressed in tsA201 cells (17 pS; ), SCN5A expressed in _Xenopus_ oocytes (22 pS; ), rat skeletal muscle I expressed in HEK293 cells (18 pS; ), and rat brain type II and III expressed in _Xenopus_ oocytes (19 pS and 15 pS, respectively; ;. The open-time distribution for WT-SCN1A channels was investigated 020 ms after activation. Open time histograms were constructed for voltages in the range of 30 to +10 mV and are illustrated in. The plots were fitted with single exponential functions ( A) and the average open times plotted against the test potential ( B). The calculated mean open time at 10 mV was 0.35  0.01 ms (_n_ = 4). The mean open time values were not significantly different between 30 and 10 mV, but decreased at more positive potentials ( B). We also analyzed latency to first channel opening. C illustrates latency to first event histograms obtained from 100 consecutive traces recorded at 30 and 10 mV from a cell with three channels. Cumulative histograms were transformed as if each patch contained one channel () and fitted with single exponential functions. The calculated latencies for WT-SCN1A channels for the voltage range 30 to +10 mV are plotted in D. In this voltage rage, the latency for first opening displays voltage dependence at hyperpolarizing potentials, but none at depolarizing potentials. At the test potential of 30 mV, WT-SCN1A channels open with a latency of 1.19  0.07 ms (_n_ = 3). Channel latency shortens slightly at more depolarizing potentials, (10 mV, 0.55  0.03 ms, _n_ = 4; +10 mV, 0.46  0.09 ms, _n_ = 3), a trend reflected at the whole-cell level. In D we also plot time to peak current obtained from whole-cell recordings from cells expressing WT-SCN1A activated from a holding potential of 100 mV. The whole-cell current reaches its maximum at 30 mV much slower than at other measured voltages, and it activates with similar rate in the 10 to +10 mV range. The single-channel properties determined for WT-SCN1A can now be used as a reference to understand the mechanisms responsible for mutant channel behavior. The most prominent effects on SCN1A function associated with the GEFS+ mutations R1648H and R1657C are increased persistent current () and reduced current density (), respectively. We focused our efforts to determine single-channel behaviors that would explain the biophysical changes in SCN1A activity observed at the whole-cell level. illustrates typical single-channel behavior for R1648H (top) and R1657C (bottom) channels measured at 0 or 10 mV. Both patches have five channels per patch. Unlike WT-SCN1A, R1648H channels display openings 20 ms after onset of the test depolarization, well after the wild-type channel becomes inactive (see. Some of the late channel openings observed in R1648H patches exhibited long open times, but overt bursting behavior was never evident. In contrast, the single channel behavior of R1657C closely resembles the wild-type channel with rare late channel openings. shows current traces recorded at 10 mV from multichannel outside-out patches excised from cells expressing either R1648H (10 channels/patch) or R1657C (five channels/patch) channels. The normalized ensemble average currents () show rapid activation and inactivation qualitatively similar to corresponding currents measured in the whole-cell configuration. The ensemble average currents compiled from R1648H patch recordings exhibited a persistent current ( A) that was absent in R1657C ( B) and WT-SCN1A ( A) patches. Ensemble-average current decay recorded from both mutants was fitted with a double exponential function, and the fast and slow time constants were plotted as a function of voltage ( C). The inactivation time constants derived using this approach did not differ between WT-SCN1A and the two mutant alleles in agreement with prior whole-cell measurements. Single-channel amplitudes for both mutants were measured by fitting all-points amplitude histograms with Gaussian curves. D shows the single-channel currents for R1648H and R1657C channels plotted against the test potential and the slope conductance obtained by linear regression. The calculated slope conductances for the mutants are 16.9  0.9 pS (_n_ = 7) for R1648H and 16.8  1.0 pS (_n_ = 6) for R1657C in the 30 to +10 mV range. These results indicate that neither mutation affects the single-channel conductance of SCN1A. The reduction in R1657C whole-cell current density can hence only result from a decrease in open probability, the number of functional channels at the plasma membrane, or both. We also calculated the single-channel conductance for R1648H channel openings measured 100 ms after the depolarization onset and found that this value is indistinguishable from that calculated for the first 10 ms (16.2  0.3 pS, _n_ = 6; D). This result suggests that both the transient and persistent current observed in whole-cell recordings from R1648H-expressing cells are carried by the same channels. We previously demonstrated a persistent noninactivating current carried by R1648H in excised outside-out patch recordings at one test potential. In this study we measured the persistent (40 ms post pulse) and peak ensemble-average currents in the 30 to +10 mV range. A illustrates the ratio of persistent to peak current observed for WT-SCN1A and R1648H channels. The persistent current in R1648H patches was 57% of the peak current and exhibited a slight voltage dependence between 30 and +10 mV range. In the same voltage range, the persistent/peak ratios obtained for WT-SCN1A channels were negligible. B shows all-point amplitude histograms from excised outside-out patches expressing either WT-SCN1A (left) or R1648H (right) obtained between 30 and 40 ms after depolarization to 0 mV. The wild-type channels did not exhibit openings during this time window. By contrast, R1648H channels exhibit significant channel openings well beyond the time when WT-SCN1A patches become quiescent. Our data also indicate that R1648H channel reopening was voltage independent. C shows the calculated open probability for WT-SCN1A and R1648H channels 20100 ms after activation of the channels from a holding potential of 100 mV. In these experiments, _Po_ was calculated by integrating the current in each record and dividing it by the single-channel amplitude, the number of channels in the patch, and the length of the interval, 80 ms. Throughout the tested voltage range (30 to +10 mV), the estimated _P_o for R1648H channels was 0.015. At the same voltage range, WT-SCN1A channels could open (see ) albeit with much lower _P_o (0.002). We also compared the open-time distribution of R1648H channels and WT-SCN1A channels. Open-time histograms were constructed with data obtained at 0 mV during the 20-ms period immediately following channel activation ( D, left). Unlike the WT-SCN1A plots, R1648H histograms were better fit by double exponential functions ( D). Two open times were calculated (0.23  0.02, 5.63  2.02, _n_ = 5; D, right). The smaller open time was undistinguishable from the single open time observed for WT-SCN1A (0.25  0.03, _n_ = 4; D). Approximately 80% (81.5  4.2%) of R1648H channel openings were characterized by having the smaller open time. These data indicate that the R1648H mutation causes channel reopening with a low but significant open probability, and the appearance of a second, less frequent, longer open time. Conceivably, the R1648H mutation could induce channels to more readily enter a slower gating mode. illustrates single-channel recordings and open probability dairies for WT-SCN1A and R1648H channels activated at 0 mV from a holding potential of 100 mV. Wild-type channels exhibit occasional periods of increased _P_o possibly consistent with infrequent shifts to a slower gating mode. The data also indicate that R1648H channels have a much higher basal _P_o but are not clustered in a manner suggesting gating mode shifts that differ from WT-SCN1A. The substitution of arginine 1657 by cysteine causes 50% reduction in current density when compared with WT-SCN1A. Whole-cell current is the product of the number of functional channels in the plasma membrane, the single-channel current, and the channel open probability. To determine which of these variables is affected by the R1657C mutation, we performed single-channel analysis of this mutant allele. As discussed above, the single-channel conductance of R1657C (16.8  1.0, _n_ = 6) is not statistically different from that of the wild-type channel (17.2  0.5, _n_ = 10). Therefore, either the number of functional channels in the plasma membrane or the channel open probability must be affected by this mutation. To differentiate between these possibilities, we compared the peak open probability, mean open time, and latency to first opening between WT-SCN1A and R1657C channels. illustrates the peak open probability and open times for WT-SCN1A and the R1657C channels. Peak _Po_ was obtained by dividing the peak current obtained from ensemble-average currents and divided by the single-channel amplitude and number of channels in the patch. In the voltage range tested (30 to +10 mV), both properties are indistinguishable between the two alleles. We also analyzed latency to first channel opening using cumulative histograms. The calculated latencies for the voltage range 30 to +10 mV are plotted in C. Again, no significant differences were observed between WT-SCN1A and R1657C channels. A similar result was obtained when comparing time to peak whole-cell current plot ( D) recorded from cells expressing WT-SCN1A or R1657C activated from a holding potential of 100 mV. Collectively, these results implicate a decrease in the number of functional channels at the plasma membrane as the most plausible explanation for the reduced whole-cell current observed in R1657C-expressing cells. In this study, we characterized the single-channel behavior of WT-SCN1A and two mutant SCN1A channels to deepen our understanding of the abnormal biophysical properties associated with inherited epilepsy syndromes. Specifically, we focused on two GEFS+-associated alleles, R1648H and R1657C, that affect residues within the D4/S4 segment yet exhibit distinct functional derangements. Previously, we revealed a complex relationship between genotype and phenotype among SCN1A-linked epilepsy syndromes through characterization of whole-cell currents exhibited by heterologously expressed mutants. Further dissection of biophysical phenotypes, particularly at the single-channel level, of disease-producing mutants represents an important next step in advancing our understanding of neuronal sodium channel disorders. The single-channel behavior of heterologously expressed WT-SCN1A resembles native mammalian neuronal sodium channels in many respects. The calculated slope conductance of recombinant WT-SCN1A is 17 pS, well within the range of previously reported values (1620 pS) recorded from rat (; ; ; ) and human () neurons. The observed mean open time exhibited by the heterologously expressed channel was voltage independent within the 30 to 10 mV range and decreased at more depolarized potentials very similar to native sodium channels observed in rat retinal ganglion and cortical motor neurons. Similarities between recombinant SCN1A and native neuronal sodium channels also exist in the voltage dependence of channel latency. The first latency observed for WT-SCN1A decreased 50% from 30 to 10 mV, quite similar to the behavior of rat neuronal sodium channels. By contrast, mean open time was observed to increase with depolarizing potentials in rat hippocampal CA1 neurons. This discrepancy might be explained by the spatial pattern of sodium channel isoforms in the mammalian brain. Immunohistochemical analysis of human brain has previously demonstrated that SCN1A (NaV1.1) is expressed primarily in neuronal cell bodies and proximal processes in many brain regions (), but is expressed less than other neuronal sodium channel types in some areas. Furthermore, in rat hippocampus, NaV1.2 is expressed at a substantially higher rate than NaV1.1 () while NaV1.1 is expressed at higher levels than NaV1.2 in rat cortex. Previous analysis at the whole-cell level showed that the most prominent effects on SCN1A function by the R1648H and R1657C mutations were persistent sodium current and reduced current density, respectively. The R1648H mutation affects a positive residue in the middle of D4/S4, while R1657C affects the innermost positive residue in this voltage-sensing segment. Neither mutation affects the single-channel conductance, the rate of ensemble average current decay, and the voltage at which peak current is measured. The R1657C mutation causes 50% reduction in current density. Our present results show that the substitution of arginine 1657 by cysteine does not affect single-channel conductance, peak open probability, mean open time, or channel latency. Thus, the reduced whole-cell current is most likely due to a lower number of functional channels at the plasma membrane, possibly by defective protein trafficking. It is less likely that reduced channel number reflects lower translation efficiency due to rare codon usage because in humans the two cysteine codons are observed with equal frequency. Interestingly, another SMEI-associated mutation, F1661S, causes an amino acid substitution four residues COOH terminal to R1657C and an 50% reduction in current density. Single-channel analysis of this mutant, in combination with biochemical experiments for both SCN1A mutants, will help clarify whether the mechanism for lower current density represents a trafficking defect. Ensemble-average recordings from outside-out patches expressing R1648H channels display a persistent current that is voltage independent in the 30 to +10 mV range. This persistent current is due to reopening of R1648H channels late in the test pulse at a time long after wild-type channels are typically inactivated. The single-channel conductance for R1648H late openings (<100 ms after depolarization onset) was the same as that determined for openings occurring during the first 10 ms. Furthermore, we never observed patches with only late openings. These observations indicate that the persistent current is carried by mutant SCN1A channels with defective inactivation and not by a distinct subset of noninactivating channels. Persistent sodium current has been described in cells isolated from normal heart (e.g., ), brain (e.g., ; ), and muscle (e.g.,. Under physiological conditions, the persistent sodium current serves to amplify or spatially integrate synaptic potentials, and allows excitable cells to generate subthreshold oscillations or reduce the threshold for repetitive action potential firing (;. Increased levels of persistent current have also been associated with certain human channelopathies. In familial hyperkalemic periodic paralysis (HYPP), mutations in _SCN4A_ encoding the human skeletal muscle sodium channel -subunit (hNaV1.4) cause impairments in fast inactivation, leading to increased persistent current (; ;. Similarly, mutations that disrupt inactivation of the cardiac sodium channel cause increased persistent current and the congenital long QT syndrome (; ;. In epilepsy, certain _SCN1A_ mutations promote increased persistent current, and this phenomenon likely contributes directly to epileptiform activity in the brain. Consistent with this idea, persistent current underlies the epileptic activity in a cultured neuronal system (; ) and is effectively suppressed by the anticonvulsant drug phenytoin. It is clear from these observations that increased persistent sodium current can be pathological in different cell types. Single-channel analyses of native and heterologously expressed sodium channels exhibiting persistent current have in some cases revealed enhanced entry of channels into a noninactivating gating mode. For example, this modal gating model for dysfunctional sodium channels in long QT syndrome predicts that individual channels will exhibit normal gating behavior most of the time but have paroxysms of noninactivating channel activity. Does a modal gating model explain increased persistent current exhibited by R1648H? Experiments with a recently developed computational model of SCN1A behavior based upon a Markovian gating scheme proposed a gating mode shift to explain persistent current in the R1648H mutant. This work was based in part on our preliminary description of single-channel behavior of R1648H from multichannel patches (at least 10 channels per patch). Our new results were obtained from patches containing 5 channels and suggest that R1648H reopenings are not clustered in a manner consistent with gating mode shifts that differ from WT-SCN1A. This implies that a biophysical mechanism that fundamentally impairs all modes of fast inactivation is a more likely explanation for our findings. Channel reopenings in the absence of modal gating have been observed also for certain SCN4A mutants. The expression of SCN4A mutants R1448H and R1448C in tsA201 cells showed channel reopenings without a clustering of events in time. These mutant SCN4A channels also exhibited increased mean open time similar to what we observed for SCN1A-R1648H. Persistent current in the absence of modal gating has also been observed in cultured muscle cells obtained from subjects with paramyotonia congenita caused by the SCN4A-T1313M mutation. These observations indicate collectively that there are multiple biophysical mechanisms capable of generating increased persistent sodium current. The D4/S4 segment has previously been demonstrated to participate in the coupling of channel activation to inactivation (; ; ; ), and therefore, we can speculate that impaired inactivation observed for R1648H could be a manifestation of disturbed activationinactivation coupling. Interestingly, this effect occurs in the absence of altered fast inactivation time constants or differences in the voltage dependence of activation or inactivation. Another possibility to explain this gating defect is destabilization of the inactivated state with a resulting greater propensity to recover and reactivate. Residue charge alone may not explain the observed effects of R1648H on SCN1A function. Recent experiments from our laboratory designed to impart a positive charge to the substituted histidine by lowering the intracellular pH did not affect the persistent current caused by the R1648H mutation. Similarly, in experiments performed with rat brain IIA (NaV1.2) channels, the identical substitution to SCN1A R1648H (designated R5H) slowed the time course of inactivation and caused a depolarizing shift in steady-state inactivation, but did not cause a persistent current. Side chain size may also influence the substitution effect. The substitution of R1648 by cysteine causes an increase in the rate of inactivation and a depolarizing shift in the voltage dependence of inactivation, in addition to a larger noninactivating current. The different effects observed when arginine is substituted by either cysteine or histidine could be due to the bulkier histidine chain altering the local structure and affecting protein interactions and channel function. Results with NaV1.4 expressed in _Xenopus_ oocytes suggest that the effects on channel behavior by the central charges in D4/S4 occur by allosteric interactions. And experiments with voltage-gated K+ channels show that there are electrostatic and structural interactions between the positively charged residues of the central to innermost section in S4 and the negatively charged residues in S2. Further detailed single-channel analysis of SCN1A R1648 cysteine mutant, and novel mutations where the residue charge is neutralized independently of intracellular pH (e.g., glutamine) or by charge substitution with a less bulky side chain (e.g., lysine), may provide a better understanding of the functional role of this residue in SCN1A and other voltage-gated Na+ channels. In this study we provide the most comprehensive single-channel study of WT-SCN1A and two GEFS+-associated mutants reported to date. Our observations provide further clarity regarding the biophysical mechanism underlying the abnormal persistent sodium current caused by the mutants, including demonstration that enhanced modal gating is not responsible for the increased persistent sodium current exhibited by R1648H. This work will serve as the basis for understanding sodium channel dysfunction in epilepsy and aid in the development of advanced computational models to explain the underlying defect in neuronal excitability that promotes seizures. 