The tetraspanin CD151 is a cell-surface molecule known for its strong lateral interaction with the laminin-binding integrin 31. Patients with a nonsense mutation in _CD151_ display end-stage kidney failure associated with regional skin blistering and sensorineural deafness, and mice lacking the integrin 3 subunit die neonatally because of severe abnormalities in the lung and kidney epithelia. We report the generation of _Cd151_-null mice that recapitulate the renal pathology of human patients, i.e., with age they develop massive proteinuria caused by focal glomerulosclerosis, disorganization of the glomerular basement membrane, and tubular cystic dilation. However, neither skin integrity nor hearing ability are impaired in the _Cd151_-null mice. Furthermore, we generated podocyte-specific conditional knockout mice for the integrin 3 subunit that show renal defects similar to those in the _Cd151_ knockout mice. Our results support the hypothesis that CD151 plays a key role in strengthening 31-mediated adhesion in podocytes. 
Tetraspanins form a family of small proteins that are expressed in virtually all cell types and tissues (;. They consist of short intracellular termini, four transmembrane domains, and one small and one large extracellular loop that contain two highly conserved cysteine motifs. Tetraspanins oligomerize into tetraspanin-enriched microdomains, in which they associate with integrins, Ig superfamily members, growth factor receptors, and proteoglycans. Tetraspanin-enriched microdomains modulate diverse cellular activities, such as adhesion strengthening, migration, signal transduction, and proliferation. The importance of proper tetraspanin function is demonstrated by several human diseases; distinct mutations in _A15_ (_TSPAN7_) and _RDS_ (_TSPAN22_) cause X-linked mental retardation and retinal dystrophy, respectively (;. A nonsense mutation in _CD151_ (_TSPAN24_) leads to end-stage hereditary nephropathy associated with pretibial epidermolysis bullosa and sensorineural deafness. CD151 is expressed in epithelia, endothelia, muscle cells, renal glomeruli, proximal and distal tubules, Schwann cells, platelets, and dendritic cells (;. Extensive biochemical studies have shown that CD151 is the primary tetraspanin associated with the laminin-binding integrins 31, 61, 64, and 71 (, ; ;. The interaction of CD151 with 31 is particularly strong and occurs at high stoichiometry. Integrins are  heterodimeric cell surface proteins that dynamically link the extracellular matrix and/or adjacent cells to the intracellular cytoskeleton (;. In epithelial cells, the integrins 31 and 64 are mainly present in the basolateral compartment, where they bind to the basement membrane component laminin-5. Although much more severe, the phenotypes associated with mutations in _Itga3_, _Itga6_, and _Itgb4_ share features with the phenotype of patients with truncated CD151, indicating that the CD15131 and CD15164 heterotrimers are functionally important. Mice that lack the 4 subunit suffer from extensive detachment of the epidermis, and patients without functional 64 display junctional epidermolysis bullosa (;. Mice without 3 exhibit the mild skin blistering associated with ruptured basement membranes and die shortly after birth because of severe abnormalities in the epithelia of lung and kidney (;. In the renal glomerulus, podocytes are anchored to the glomerular basement membrane (GBM) via 31 and dystroglycans. The interdigitating foot processes (FPs) of podocytes are connected by glomerular epithelial slit diaphragms (GESDs) consisting of nephrin, podocin, P-cadherin, and other proteins, which are linked directly or indirectly to the cytoskeleton. Both disturbed podocyteGBM anchoring and podocytepodocyte interaction at the level of GESDs lead to the loss of FPs, a dysfunctional filtration barrier, and, ultimately, to glomerulosclerosis and renal failure. We report the generation of knockout mice for _Cd151_ that show severe renal failure caused by progressive abnormalities of the GBM, loss of podocyte FPs, glomerulosclerosis, and cystic tubular dilation. Furthermore, we show that mice with a targeted deletion of the 3 subunit in podocytes have a similar, although more severe, phenotype. _Cd151_-null mice were generated (Fig. S1, available at ), born at the expected Mendelian ratio (0.28 (+/+): 0.49 (+/): 0.23 (/); _n_ = 86), and appeared to be healthy and normal at first observation. However, urine analysis of _Cd151_/ mice by SDS-PAGE revealed that all mice developed proteinuria before 3 wk of age, which is indicative of kidney dysfunction. Both the onset and the degree of proteinuria were variable. Nevertheless, all knockout mice had to be killed before the age of 9 mo because of substantial loss of body weight. A quantitative immunoassay of urinary albumin showed high levels of this protein in _Cd151_/ mice that increased with age and reached a plateau at 6 wk (3 mo follow up; unpublished data). In contrast, only traces of albumin were present in the urine of wild-type and _Cd151_+/ mice. As expected, the severity of the renal pathology among _Cd151_/ littermates also varied considerably (), and there were animals with mildly or severely affected kidneys in the same litter. Histological examination of the mildly affected kidneys showed focal glomerulosclerosis, and interstitial fibrosis and inflammation. The GBM of some capillary loops was abnormally thick and formed extensive spikes. EM revealed that the GBM was laminated and that FPs in contact with the abnormal GBM were effaced. On the vascular side, the endothelium was swollen and fenestrations were occasionally lost. Severely affected kidneys were contracted and their capsules granulated because of cortical degeneration. Light microscopy showed extensive glomerulosclerosis in several stages, tuft adhesions to Bowman's capsule with extracapillary cell proliferation and fibrosis, and marked expansion of the mesangial matrix. Proximal tubuli were either dilated and contained PAS-positive protein casts or they displayed degeneration of varying severity. Furthermore, we observed periglomerular fibrosis and focal interstitial inflammation in close proximity to interlobular blood vessels (unpublished data). Silver staining showed the glomeruli to be segmentally or globally sclerosed with extensive deposits of basement membrane components (), an observation that could be confirmed by ultrastructural analysis (unpublished data). To investigate at what age GBM defects occur, we subjected kidneys of newborn and 1-wk-old _Cd151_/ mice to EM. Although many capillary loops of newborn _Cd151_/ mice already have a laminated GBM, it seems that spike formation does not occur until the mice are 1-wk-old (unpublished data). Together, these observations suggest that the mild abnormalities found in some of the mice represent early stages of the severe phenotype in the other mice. Tubular changes may be secondary to massive glomerular protein leakage, but may also reflect dysfunction of the tubules themselves. To investigate whether the progressive GBM abnormalities are correlated with glomerular injury, we stained for tenascin-C and fibulin-2. Both proteins have been shown to be up-regulated in response to glomerular and vascular lesions (;. We observed an increased glomerular expression of tenascin-C in both mildly and severely affected kidneys, but fibulin-2 was up-regulated only in the latter. Whereas fibulin-2 is important for the migration of smooth muscle cells, tenascin-C regulates migration of a variety of cell types, including fibroblasts (;. The finding that tenascin-C is already present in the early stages of the disease suggests that fibrosis precedes the pathology of the vasculature. Consistent with the ultrastructural finding that the GBM of _Cd151_/ mice is thickened, staining for nidogen and laminin-10 revealed an abnormally strong presence of these GBM components in peripheral capillary loops and extracapillary spaces ( and PR). To exclude an arrest of the normal developmental switch from 1.1.2 (IV) collagen to the 3.4.5 (IV) and 5.5.6 (IV) collagen networks, as seen in the X-linked form of Alport's syndrome (), we stained for all six chains of collagen IV. The results showed the mature collagen IV pattern to be present in all glomeruli (unpublished data). Only the 2 (IV) chain was strongly up-regulated in podocytes of the severely affected kidneys. We also checked the integrity of the filtration barrier by staining for the GESD components podocin and nephrin ( and UW). Both proteins appeared to be down-regulated in the mildly affected kidneys, and are almost absent in the severely affected kidneys, demonstrating a complete loss of GESD architecture. Together, these results support the hypothesis that in _Cd151_-null mice disorganization of the GBM precedes the effacement of FPs and the loss of GESDs. Patients with a nonsense mutation in _CD151_ () also have epidermolysis bullosa and deafness, but neither of these was observed in the _Cd151_/ mice by histological and immunofluorescent analysis and measurements of auditory brainstem responses (ABR), respectively (Fig. S2, available at. The highly stoichiometric binding of CD151 to the 31 integrin, and the fact that mice lacking the 3 subunit show severe renal defects, led us to hypothesize that the absence of CD15131 complexes is responsible for the renal pathology seen in our _Cd151_-null mice. In _Itga3_ knockout mice, glomerular capillary branching is impaired, leading to a decreased number of capillary loops. Furthermore, podocytes fail to form normal FPs and lose lateral cell junctions. To study the deletion of _Itga3_ after glomerular capillary branching, and to investigate possible similarities with the phenotype in our _Cd151_-null mice, we generated conditional _Itga3_ knockout mice and crossed them with 2.5P-Cre mice that express the Cre recombinase under the control of the human podocin promoter. As shown by immunofluorescence, 3 is, indeed, almost absent in the glomeruli of these 2.5P-Cre; _Itga3_fl/fl mice (), indicating that this integrin subunit is mainly expressed by differentiated podocytes. 2.5P-Cre; _Itga3_fl/fl mice show massive proteinuria starting within the first week of age (), develop abdominal edema when 56-wk-old and, subsequently, have to be killed. Structurally, the milky, discolored kidneys contain partially sclerosed glomeruli with a disorganized GBM and prominent protein casts in dilated proximal tubuli. EM revealed a complete effacement of podocyte FPs in newborns (unpublished data) and, in addition, widespread lamination and protrusions of the GBM in 6-wk-old mice. Immunofluorescence showed changes similar to those in _Cd151_/ mice, i.e., up-regulation of tenascin-C and fibulin, strong staining of the GBM components nidogen and laminin-10, and down-regulation of the GESD proteins podocin and nephrin. Notably, sclerosis of the glomeruli, up-regulation of the collagen 2 (IV) chain, and down-regulation of podocin and nephrin is much less prominent in the 2.5P-Cre; _Itga3_fl/fl mice than in the _Cd151_ knockout mice. 2.5P-Cre; _Itga3_+/fl mice do not develop structural or functional renal abnormalities (,, and ); neither do 6-wk-old compound heterozygotes (2.5P-Cre; _Itga3_+/fl; _Cd151_+/), which may suggest that a simultaneous reduction of 3 and CD151 does not result in renal defects. However, we cannot prove that the expression of these proteins is actually reduced in the compound heterozygotes, nor can we exclude that renal pathology develops upon aging. Because _Cd151_-null mice can form normal GBMs with a regular FP pattern () and expression of both 3 and 6 in the glomeruli and tubules appeared to be normal (), we suggest that the function of 3 in development is not affected by the absence of CD151. Instead, we propose that reduced integrin 31-mediated adhesion is the main cause of the phenotype observed in our _Cd151_/ mice. The filtration of plasma exerts considerable mechanical stress on the filtration barrier. Podocyte FPs, thus, have to withstand substantial mechanical forces. Indeed, CD151 appears to be involved in adhesion strengthening because adhesions mediated by CD15161 complexes tolerate stronger mechanical forces than those mediated by 61 alone. A similar effect has been suggested for CD15131 complexes. Thus, FPs without CD151 might not be able to withstand prolonged transcapillary pressure, a phenomenon that is also responsible for the renal manifestations in the Alport's syndrome after several years of life in patients with an abnormal GBM caused by collagen type IV mutations. Epithelial cells may become partially detached, leading to a compensatory production of new basement membrane components. As a result, the GBM thickens and spikes are formed, as has also been described in membranous nephropathy. Correct reassembly of basement membranes upon injury is impaired in the skin of _Cd151_-null mice. If the absence of CD151 is similarly important for GBM repair, this vicious circle would indeed result in glomerular malfunction. As shown by ultrastructural and immunofluorescent analysis, glomerulosclerosis precedes the loss of GESD components, leading to the aforementioned renal pathology. The assumption that CD151 is important for maintaining glomerular architecture upon mechanical stress is in accordance with the observation that glomeruli develop normally and that abnormalities only occur after several weeks or months. Furthermore, it explains differences in the rate of progression among littermates, as the degree of intraglomerular hydrostatic pressure depends on several genetic and epigenetic factors. Differences in genetic background might also explain why _Cd151_-null mice that have been previously described did not show renal failure as observed in our mice. In conclusion, we show that the renal manifestations in our mice lacking CD151 are similar to those in patients with a mutated _CD151_. Our data support in vitro studies pointing to a role of CD151 in adhesion strengthening, thus, suggesting that CD15131 complexes have an essential function in vivo. Urine from mice younger than 3-wk-old were collected by applying gentle dorsal pressure to the caudal area of the animal. Older mice were placed in metabolic cages for 24 h. Samples were either analyzed by SDS-PAGE, followed by Coomassie Brilliant blue staining, or by competitive ELISA using the Albuwell M kit that was obtained from Exocell. Sections of kidneys were prepared, fixed for 1 d in EAF (ethanol, acetic acid, and formaldehyde), and stained with PAS-D, HE, or Jones' methenamine silver. Images were taken with PL APO objectives (10/0.25 NA, 40/0.95 NA, and 63/1.4 NA oil; Carl Zeiss MicroImaging, Inc.) on an Axiovert S100/AxioCam HR color system using AxioVision 4 software (Carl Zeiss MicroImaging, Inc.). After fixation in Karnovsky buffer for 48 h, the material was post-fixed with 1% osmiumtetroxide, the tissue samples were block-stained with 1% uranyl acetate, dehydrated in dimethoxypropane, and embedded in epoxyresin LX-112. LM sections were stained with toluidine blue. EM sections were stained with tannic acid, uranyl acetate, and lead citrate, and then examined using a transmission electron microscope (Philips CM10; FEI). Images were acquired using a digital transmission EM camera (Morada 1012; Soft Imaging System) using Research Assistant software (RvC). Rat mAbs used in this study were 4G6 against laminin-10 (provided by L. Sorokin, University of Mnster, Mnster, Germany), GoH3 against 6, MB1.2 against 1 (a gift from B.M. Chan, University of Western Ontario, London, Canada), LAT-2 against tenascin-C (), and 346-11A against 4 (Abcam). Y. Sado (Shigei Medical Research Institute, Yamada, Japan) provided the rat mAbs H11, H22, H31, RH42, M54, and B66 against the mouse collagen IV chains 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6, respectively. Rabbit polyclonal antibodies (pAbs) directed against mouse nidogen and mouse fibulin-2 were generous gifts from T. Sasaki (Max Planck Institute for Biochemistry, Mnchen, Germany); pAbs against nephrin and podocin were from H. Holthfer (University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland), and C. Antignac (Cochin Biomedical Research Institute, Paris, France). The pAbs against keratin 1 and 14 were purchased from BabCO. Immunization of New Zealand rabbits with the cytoplasmic tail of human 3A fused to GST and the peptide CKENLKDTMVKRYHQSGHEGVSSAVDKLQQEFH coupled to KLH (Pierce Chemical Co.) yielded pAbs 141742 against 3A and 140190 against CD151, respectively. Texas red and FITC-conjugated secondary antibodies were purchased from Invitrogen. Tissues from adult mice were collected and embedded in cryoprotectant (Tissue-Tek O.C.T.; Sakura Finetek Europe). Cryosections were prepared, fixed in ice-cold acetone, blocked with 2% BSA in PBS, and incubated for 45 min with primary antibodies undiluted (LAT-2, GoH3, MB1.2, 4G6) or diluted 1:2 (H22), 1:50 (346-11A), 1:100 (antifibulin-2, anto-podocin, anti-nephrin, and 141742), 1:250 (anti-nidogen), and 1:300 (anti-keratin 1 and 14), followed by incubation with secondary antibodies diluted 1:200 for 45 min. Samples were analyzed at 37C using a 63/1.4 HCX PL APO CS objective on a TCS SP2 AOBS confocal microscope (both from Leica). Images were acquired using LCS 2.61 (Leica) and processed using CorelDRAW Graphics Suite 12 (Corel). Fig. S1 shows the targeting strategy and molecular analysis of recombinant embryonic stem cells and _Cd151_ knockout mice. Fig. S2 shows the histology and immunofluorescence analysis of keratins 1 and 14 on back skin samples from wild-type and _Cd151_/ mice, as well as auditory hearing thresholds of wild-type, _Cd151_+/, and _Cd151_/ mice upon click and tone burst stimuli, as determined by ABR measurements. The Supplemental materials and methods describes the generation of transgenic mice, immunoblotting, and ABR measurements. Online supplemental material is available at. 