Intragenic Copy Number Variation within _Filaggrin_ Contributes to the Risk of Atopic Dermatitis with a Dose-Dependent Effect
Loss-of-function variants within the _filaggrin_ gene (_FLG)_ increase the risk of atopic dermatitis. _FLG_ also demonstrates intragenic copy number variation (CNV), with alleles encoding 10, 11, or 12 filaggrin monomers; hence, CNV may affect the amount of filaggrin expressed in the epidermis. A total of 876 Irish pediatric atopic dermatitis cases were compared with 928 population controls to test the hypothesis that CNV within _FLG_ affects the risk of atopic dermatitis independently of _FLG-_null mutations. Cases and controls were screened for CNV and common _FLG-_null mutations. In this population the 11-repeat allele was most prevalent (allele frequency 51.5%); the 10-repeat allele frequency was 33.9% and the 12-repeat allele frequency was 14.6%. Having excluded _FLG_ mutation carriers, the control group had a significantly higher number of repeats than cases (2 _P_=0.043), and the odds ratio of disease was reduced by a factor of 0.88 (95% confidence interval 0.780.98, _P_=0.025) for each additional unit of copy number. Breakdown products of filaggrin were quantified in tape-stripped stratum corneum from 31 atopic dermatitis patients and urocanic acid showed a positive correlation with total copy number. CNV within _FLG_ makes a significant, dose-dependent contribution to atopic dermatitis risk, and therefore treatments to increase filaggrin expression may have therapeutic utility. 
Atopic dermatitis (eczema) is an itchy inflammatory skin disease that affects 10.7% of children in the United States () and up to 25% in the United Kingdom (;. Atopic dermatitis can cause significant morbidity () and the associated family stress is a substantial social and financial burden. Loss-of-function mutations in the filaggrin gene (_FLG;_ OMIM *135940) cause the dry scaly skin condition ichthyosis vulgaris () (OMIM #146700) and are strongly and significantly associated with atopic dermatitis (; ;. _FLG_ is expressed in terminally differentiating keratinocytes in the outermost layers of the human epidermis as a large, insoluble polyprotein, profilaggrin. Each inactive profilaggrin molecule is dephosphorylated and cleaved into 10, 11, or 12 functional filaggrin monomers (;. Filaggrin plays a key role in epithelial barrier function: it aggregates and aligns keratin bundles in the cornified cell envelope and is further degraded to release hygroscopic amino acids, constituents of the natural moisturizing factor in human skin (;. _FLG_ is located within the epidermal differentiation complex on chromosome 1q21, a dense cluster of genes involved in keratinocyte differentiation. _FLG_ belongs to the fused S100 gene family, characterized by a repetitive sequence in a large third exon. The human _FLG_ gene is polymorphic, with common allelic variants showing 10, 11, or 12 nearly identical tandem repeats in exon 3, each 972bp in length (;. The _FLG_ locus therefore demonstrates intragenic copy number variation, using the definition of copy number variation (CNV) proposed by ) and. Each repeat at the DNA level encodes a complete copy of the 324 amino-acid filaggrin polypeptide, the functional protein product of the gene. Alleles encode 10, 11, or 12 copies of the filaggrin monomer, and consequently CNV may affect the quantity of filaggrin expressed in the epidermis. Early CNV studies, based on BAC (Bacterial Artificial Chromosome) arrays or low-resolution oligonucleotide platforms, were able to identify CNVs >100kb (; ; ;. More recent studies have achieved genome-wide assessment of CNVs above 450500bp in length using comparative genomic hybridization (; ), but this technique currently lacks the power to study rare alleles or to detect an odds ratio of <1.4. We therefore used detailed PCR-based genotyping strategies to define size variants of exon 3 of _FLG_ to investigate whether CNV contributes to the risk of atopic dermatitis. A casecontrol study using a total of 925 Irish pediatric atopic dermatitis cases and 998 Irish population controls was used to test the hypothesis that CNV within _FLG_ affects atopic dermatitis risk. Of these, 876 cases (94.7%) and 928 controls (93.0%) were successfully genotyped; the demographic and clinical data are summarized in. A total of 100 consecutive atopic dermatitis cases were screened by long-range PCR and there was no evidence of CNV within the 5 portion of _FLG_ exon 3, representing repeats numbered 1 to 7 ( and. All 925 cases and 998 controls were screened using a separate long-range PCR to identify copy number variation within the 3 portion of _FLG_ exon 3, representing repeats 7 to the end of the repetitive region ( and ) and a TaqMan allelic discrimination assay for single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) rs12730241. In the Irish control population, the most prevalent allele size was 11 repeats, representing 51.5% of alleles; the 10-repeat allele frequency was 33.9% and the 12-repeat allele frequency was 14.6%. Allele counts in cases and controls are summarized in. All four prevalent _FLG-_null mutations were successfully typed in 855 out of the 876 (97.6%) cases genotyped for copy number and 926 out of 928 (99.8%) controls genotyped for copy number. Of the fully genotyped individuals, 327 (38.2%) of cases and 102 (11.0%) of controls carried one or two _FLG-_null mutations; 528 cases and 824 controls were of wild-type genotype for the four _FLG-_null mutations. _FLG-_null mutation carriers were excluded from further analysis to allow independent assessment of the CNV effect. After exclusion of the _FLG-_null mutation carriers, 2 testing showed a significantly higher total copy number in the controls than in the atopic dermatitis cases (_P_=0.043). Furthermore, logistic regression analysis of the total copy number as continuous data (considering 20, 21, 22, 23, and 24 copies) showed that the addition of each subsequent filaggrin-encoding unit reduces the odds ratio of disease by a factor of 0.88 (95% confidence interval 0.780.98, _P_=0.025). Therefore, an individual having two 12-repeat alleles, compared with an individual with two 10-repeat alleles, has a risk reduction of 0.88 to the power of 4, meaning a 0.60 times reduced risk of developing atopic dermatitis. Linear regression analysis comparing filaggrin breakdown products quantified by HPLC of tape-stripped stratum corneum from 31 atopic dermatitis cases () showed a small but statistically significant correlation between urocanic acid concentration (UCA) and _FLG_ total copy number (_r_=0.42, _P_=0.018; online). The value _r_2=0.18 indicates that 18% of the variation of UCA in the stratum corneum samples may be attributed to _FLG_ CNV. The concentrations of two other breakdown products of filaggrin, histidine and pyrrolidone-5-carboxylic acid (PCA), each also showed a small positive correlation with _FLG_ total copy number (histidine _r_=0.20, PCA _r_=0.28) but these were not statistically significant ( online). Assessment of the entire range of genetic and genomic variation (including SNPs, structural variation, noncoding variants, long-range _trans_ effects, and so on) will be required in order to fully understand the genetic predisposition to complex traits such as atopic dermatitis. Loss-of-function mutations in _FLG_ represent the strongest and most significant genetic factor in the etiology of atopic dermatitis characterized to date (; ; ), with an odds ratio estimated by meta-analysis to be 3.12. This study contributes to the understanding of haploinsufficiency in atopic dermatitis by showing that CNV within _FLG_ also significantly affects atopic dermatitis risk. The CNV effect is independent of _FLG-_null mutations but the overall effect size is smaller, as the comparable odds ratio is 1/0.88=1.14. However, logistic regression analysis shows a dose-dependent effect, such that the risk reduces incrementally as the total number of filaggrin monomers encoded on a pair of alleles increases. Therefore, an individual with 20 filaggrin repeats has an odds ratio of 1/0.60=1.67 compared with an individual having a total of 24 repeats. As all of the size variant alleles are common within the population (33.9%, 10 repeats; 51.5%, 11 repeats; and 14.6%, 12 repeats), this form of genetic variation represents a significant additional contribution to AD risk. The polymorphic _FLG_ alleles segregate in families according to Mendelian inheritance () and therefore may contribute to the observed familial clustering of atopic disease. Filaggrin is a histidine-rich protein () and _FLG-_null mutations have been shown to affect the quantitative expression of histidine and subsequent filaggrin breakdown products in the stratum corneum of atopic dermatitis patients and control individuals. This study has shown that CNV within _FLG_ may have a significant functional effect on the amount of UCA in the stratum corneum, with a small but significant correlation accounting for 18% of the variation in UCA concentration. UCA is a component of the natural moisturizing factor in the epidermis () and plays a role in the maintenance of stratum corneum hydration as well as being a putative UV photoprotector. The quantitative data linking _FLG_ CNV with stratum corneum UCA concentration therefore provide support for the observed genetic epidemiological association. The other filaggrin breakdown products, histidine and PCA, also showed a small positive correlation with filaggrin copy number; however, a larger study is required in order to confirm or refute these correlations. Two dermatological disorders have so far been shown to exhibit CNV as a mechanism contributing to their pathogenesis: microdeletions on chromosome 17q24.2q24.3 in congenital generalized hypertrichosis terminalis with or without gingival hyperplasia (); and deletions of the late cornified cell envelope genes _LCE3B_ and _LCE3C_ in psoriasis (;. The extent to which CNV contributes to the missing heritability of common complex traits, including psoriasis and atopic dermatitis, remains to be defined. The three common _FLG_ allele sizes (10, 11, and 12) have previously been reported in American and Irish populations (; ;. ) screened over 300 individuals by Southern blot and showed that there were approximately equal proportions of 10-, 11-, and 12-repeat alleles. In our much larger study of the Irish population, roughly one-third of alleles have 10 repeats, half have 11 repeats, and the remaining 15% are 12-repeat alleles. An investigation of 113 individuals from Winnipeg Canada suggested that the 12-repeat allele may be a protective factor against self-perceived frequent dry skin (), but this study was performed before knowledge of _FLG-_null mutations as a cause of common ichthyosis (; ), and hence the data are difficult to interpret. In retrospect, it appears likely that the observed association is attributable to a risk effect of the two common, ancestral _FLG-_null mutations (R501X and 2282del4) that usually do not occur on the 12-repeat allele (A Sandilands, unpublished data). It is theoretically possible that the observed association of copy number with atopic dermatitis risk may be caused by linkage of the 10-repeat allele to an unrecognized _FLG_ loss-of-function mutation. However, this is unlikely to account for the statistically significant association for three reasons: the prevalence and distribution of _FLG-_null mutations in the Irish population is well established () and mutations other than the four that were assayed in this study are rare; furthermore, the statistical analysis of the continuous data shows an incremental reduction in the risk of atopic dermatitis with each additional unit of copy number; finally, the correlation of total copy number with stratum corneum UCA concentration provides additional evidence of a stepwise functional effect. Carriers of the four _FLG-_null mutations that are prevalent in the population were excluded from statistical analysis in order to study the independent effect of CNV on atopic dermatitis risk. This approach is necessary because _FLG-_null mutations have such a profound effect on filaggrin expression, which is reduced to near zero in homozygotes or compound heterozygotes (), that the more subtle effect of CNV could be obscured. It would be interesting to study the effect of CNV _in trans_ with _FLG-_null mutations to investigate the possibility that larger copy number variants may provide some protection by partially ameliorating the effect of a _FLG-_null allele, or conversely the smaller copy number variants may serve to worsen the phenotype of a _FLG_-null heterozygote. However, even the total sample size of nearly 2,000 individuals in this study was not large enough to have sufficient power to permit such haplotype analysis. It would also be interesting to investigate the effect of _FLG_ CNV on atopic dermatitis severity, with the hypothesis that a greater number of repeats protects against severe disease whereas a smaller number of repeats increases the risk of severe disease. However, this study, having predominantly moderatesevere atopic dermatitis cases, did not have sufficient statistical power to draw any firm conclusions regarding the effect of copy number on disease severity. Previously published whole-genome association studies of CNVs focused on eight common complex traits of importance to human health (); a separate study characterized CNVs of >443bp in 450 individuals as reference genotypes from European, East Asian, and African individuals. The careful and rather laborious genotyping strategy utilized for this study has given detailed information on size variation within exon 3 of _FLG_ in nearly 2,000 Irish individuals and the same three size variantsencoding 10, 11, and 12 copies of the filaggrin monomerhave been identified. Rarer size variants including duplications, a 3.7-kb deletion (), and two large inversions involving the _FLG_ locus (; ) are recorded as single cases in the UCSC (University of California, Santa Cruz) database. Large inversions and other structural variants may not have been detected using our PCR-based genotyping assays and these cases may have contributed to the 5.3% of cases and 7.0% of controls in whom CNV genotyping failed. In contrast to human _FLG_, mouse strains show a wide range of CNV within the orthologous murine gene (_flg_), where characterized strains show between 10 and 20 filaggrin subunits. Although this study focused on CNV of 972bp sequences within _FLG_ exon 3, it is clearly possible that larger duplications of the whole _FLG_ third exon or indeed the entire _FLG_ gene may occur. In light of the dose-dependent effect of intragenic CNV, these larger CNVs would be expected to have an even greater effect on filaggrin dose in the epidermis and warrant further investigation. The discovery that _FLG-_null mutations are a strong and significant risk factor for atopic dermatitis has already led to a greater understanding of the importance of skin barrier function in atopic disease. The fact that CNV within _FLG_ significantly affects atopic dermatitis risk raises the attractive possibility that treatments aimed at increasing filaggrin expression may have a therapeutic effect on the prevention and/or treatment of atopic dermatitis. Encouragingly, our data show that even a 510% increase in filaggrin dose results in a significant reduction in the incidence of atopic dermatitis. Furthermore, as this analysis excluded _FLG-_null mutation carriers, the benefit is not likely to be restricted to the 10% of individuals in the population who carry a _FLG-_null mutation (;. It is perhaps surprising to observe that a 510% increase in filaggrin copy number is sufficient to result in a reduced risk of atopic dermatitis. There is likely to be considerable inter- and intra-individual variation in the rates of biosynthesis, processing, and degradation of filaggrin, but it may be speculated that the life-long effect of a genetically determined 510% increase in filaggrin dose may provide sufficient enhancement to skin barrier function to result in the observed risk reduction. Feasibility studies are currently underway in the United Kingdom and United States (; ) in preparation for a prospective clinical trial to investigate whether intensive emollient application in early life, with the aim of improving skin barrier function, may reduce the risk of atopic dermatitis in infancy. In the future, it may also be possible to target pathways that control filaggrin expression with small molecules and thereby develop therapeutics to boost filaggrin expression in the epidermis. It is hoped that these combined investigations will demonstrate the translation of functional genomics to better care for atopic dermatitis patients in the foreseeable future. A collection of 925 unrelated Irish pediatric atopic dermatitis cases was recruited through a tertiary referral dermatology clinic at one center, Our Lady's Children's Hospital, Crumlin, Dublin. Atopic dermatitis was defined according to the UK diagnostic criteria () and all cases were confirmed on examination by an experienced dermatologist. In all, 51.2% of cases had severe disease; 32.6% had moderate, and 16.2% had mild atopic dermatitis, defined according to the Nottingham Eczema Severity Score. Demographic and clinical data are summarized in. Carriers of the four _FLG-_null mutations that are prevalent in the Irish population (R501X, 2282del4, S3247X, and R2447X) were excluded from subsequent statistical analysis in order to study the independent effect of CNV on atopic dermatitis risk. The genetic architecture of _FLG_ loss-of-function mutations has been extensively characterized in the Irish population (; ), and together these four mutations account for >95% of _FLG_ mutations; the remaining <5% are composed of rare and family-specific mutations. A total of 998 control DNA samples were obtained from the Trinity College Dublin Biobank, representing an unselected Irish population, as described previously. Demographic data relating to the control population are summarized in. As with the case collection, carriers of the four prevalent _FLG-_null mutations in the control population were excluded from subsequent statistical analysis. This study was conducted with the approval of the local research ethics committee (Our Lady's Children's Hospital, Crumlin). A parent or guardian for each case and all control subjects gave written informed consent. The collection of DNA samples and clinical data were conducted in accordance with the Good Clinical Practice and the Declaration of Helsinki Principles. The four _FLG_ loss-of-function mutations that are most prevalent in the Irish population (R501X, 2282del4, S3247X, and R2447X) were screened in the cases and controls as previously described (;. Copy number variants were distinguished by their different sized products following PCR amplification. Amplification of the whole of exon 3 results in rather large products, ranging from 12,413 to 14,357 base pairs, within which size variants are difficult to distinguish reliably with the necessary resolution of 1,000 base pairs. Long-range PCR reactions were therefore designed to amplify the region of interest in two partially overlapping portions () as follows. In the first PCR reaction (PCR 1), the 5 portion of _FLG_ exon 3, from intron 2 (at a point near exon 3) to repeat 7, was amplified by long-range PCR using primers listed in. PCR reactions (50l) were performed using the TaKaRa LA Taq (Takara Bio, Shiga, Japan) with 200ng genomic DNA, 1 unit of TaKaRa LA Taq, 8l dNTPs (2.5m each), 25ng each of the forward and reverse primers, 5l 10  Buffer (TaKaRa), and 5l MgCl (25m). Cycle conditions for PCR 1 were as follows: 94C initial denaturation for 1minute, followed by 33 cycles of denaturation (94C for 30seconds) and elongation (68C for 10minutes), followed by a final elongation at 72C for 10minutes. Electrophoresis on a 0.8% w/v agarose gel, at 120V for 3hours, was used to identify product size. In a second PCR reaction (PCR 2), the 3 portion of _FLG_ exon 3, encompassing repeats 7 to 10 plus the 3 partial repeat, was amplified by long-range PCR using the primers shown in. Reactions (20l) were performed using the Expand High Fidelity System (Roche Applied Science, Mannheim, Germany) with 100ng genomic DNA, 1.5 units of Expand High Fidelity enzyme, 2l dNTPs (2.5m each), 10ng each of the forward and reverse primers, 2l Buffer 2 (Roche Expand High Fidelity System), and 4% v/v DMSO. Cycle conditions for PCR 2 were as follows: 95C initial denaturation for 5minutes, followed by 35 cycles of denaturation (94C for 30seconds), annealing (63.5C for 30seconds) and elongation (72C for 5minutes 30seconds), followed by a final elongation at 72C for 7minutes. Products were separated as for PCR 1, on a 0.8% w/v agarose gel. The largest product from PCR 2 is most at risk of suboptimal amplification, resulting in a weaker band when visualized on a gel under UV light. In order to minimize the risk of failing to detect the largest size allele, an additional SNP genotyping strategy was used. SNP rs12730241 is in the 3 untranslated region of _FLG_ (near to the duplicated repeats) and was shown, in 89 out of 90 (98.9%) fully sequenced individuals, to be associated with the 12-repeat allele. Rs12730241 was typed using the available predesigned TaqMan allelic discrimination assays (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA) according to the manufacturer's recommended protocols. Therefore, 12-repeat alleles shown by long-range PCR were confirmed by genotyping for SNP rs12730241. Data relating to the most abundant filaggrin breakdown productshistidine, UCA, and PCAin 31 _FLG_ wild-type atopic dermatitis cases were available from a previous study. Stratum corneum samples removed from the nonlesional skin of pediatric atopic dermatitis cases by a tape-stripping technique had undergone HPLC to quantify histidine, UCA, and PCA as previously described. In individuals with a wild-type genotype at the four screened _FLG-_null mutations, total copy number was defined as the sum of the number of tandem repeats on each allele. Total copy number genotype frequencies were compared between the case and control groups using 2 test and logistic regression analysis, performed with the statistical analysis package Stata (StataCorp LP, College Station, TX). Simple linear regression was used to test for correlation between total copy number and _FLG_ breakdown products using SPSS v 15.0.1 (IBM Corporation, Somers, NY). 