Mutations in the _Matrin 3_ gene cause familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
_MATR3_ is an RNA/DNA binding protein that interacts with TDP-43, a major disease protein linked to amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and fronto-temporal dementia. Using exome sequencing, we identified mutations in _MATR3_ in ALS kindreds. We also observed MATR3 pathology in the spinal cords of ALS cases with and without _MATR3_ mutations. Our data provide additional evidence supporting the role of aberrant RNA processing in motor neuron degeneration. 
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a devastating neurodegenerative disease characterized by progressive paralysis and respiratory failure leading to death, typically within two to three years of symptom onset. Much attention has focused on the discovery of causal genes on the basis that understanding the pathophysiology underlying motor neuron degeneration would provide rational targets for therapeutic development. These efforts have been successful to the point that the genetic etiology of two thirds of the familial form of ALS and 11% of the more common sporadic form of the disease is now known. Nevertheless, the discovery of additional genes would allow complete mapping of the cellular pathways underlying this fatal neurological condition. Here, we applied exome sequencing to a Caucasian family in which several individuals had been diagnosed with ALS and dementia () with the aim of identifying the causative mutation. We found two novel, heterozygous, missense variants that segregated with disease within this kindred, namely p.Ala436Val (chr5:126156748, C>T) in _LMNB1_ and p.Phe115Cys (chr5:138643448, T>G) in _MATR3_. Neither variant was present in population polymorphism databases (including the Exome Sequencing Project (n = 13,000 control chromosomes), the 1000 Genomes Project (n = 2,184 chromosomes) and dbSNP), or in the Human Gene Diversity Panel (HGDP, n = 2,102 chromosomes screened in our laboratory). The _MATR3_ variant was also not present in an additional 5,190 neurologically normal subjects genotyped in our laboratory, bringing the total number of control chromosomes that did not carry this transversion to 27,666. A p.Ser85Cys (chr5:138643358, C>G) mutation in _MATR3_ was previously reported as the cause of autosomal dominant, distal, asymmetrical myopathy with vocal cord paralysis in a large multi-generational family. Neurophysiological studies and muscle biopsies of affected members were variably reported to be consistent with either a neurogenic or a myopathic pattern. In light of our genetic findings, the senior author (BJT) and the neurologist who initially reported this family (HF) re-evaluated the p.Ser85Cys _MATR3_ family. Affected individuals developed progressive respiratory failure resulting in death, typically after fifteen years of illness. Pathologically brisk knee reflexes, indicative of upper motor neuron lesions, were present in four of six examined patients. One patient also had brisk upper limb reflexes, as well as tongue fasciculations and a brisk jaw jerk. All of the examined cases displayed a split-hand pattern of weakness suggestive of a lesion in the anterior horn of the cervical spinal cord, a sign commonly observed in ALS patients. These clinical findings supported reclassification of this condition as slowly progressive ALS, and the presence of upper motor neuron signs in the form of brisk reflexes ruled out myopathy as the only cause of disease in this family. To determine the frequency of _MATR3_ mutations as a cause of ALS, we examined exome sequence data from 108 additional familial ALS cases. We identified a p.Thr622Ala (chr5:138658372, A>G) missense change in _MATR3_ in a 66-year-old Sardinian diagnosed with familial ALS. This variant was present in a first-degree cousin, who had also presented with typical, rapidly progressive ALS at the age of 64. In addition, custom re-sequencing of genes linked to neurodegeneration in 96 British ALS cases identified a p.Pro154Ser (chr5:138643564, C>T) missense variant in _MATR3_ in an individual diagnosed with sporadic disease ( and. Again, neither mutation was present in population polymorphism databases or in HGDP (n = 17,286 control chromosomes). Though these data are supportive, additional studies are required to confirm the pathogenicity of these variants, especially p.Pro154Ser, which was found in a single sporadic case and consequently lacks segregation data. We did not find any additional mutations in the _LMNB1_ gene. We examined subcellular distribution of MATR3 using immunohistochemistry. In control subjects, MATR3 was detected in a granular staining pattern within the nuclei of motor neurons and surrounding glial cells. In ALS patients, MATR3 was observed in the nuclei of remaining motor neurons and occasionally within the cytoplasm. In a patient harboring the p.Phe115Cys _MATR3_ mutation, MATR3 immunoreactivity was intense within the nucleus of all motor neurons and diffuse cytoplasmic staining was evident in many neurons. Cytoplasmic inclusions were absent in this individual. However, we detected rare MATR3-positive cytoplasmic inclusions in an ALS patient known to carry the _C9ORF72_ repeat expansion. MATR3 is a 125kDa nuclear matrix protein that is known to bind DNA and RNA. Previous unbiased screens found that MATR3 is a protein interactor of TDP-43, an RNA binding protein that is known to cause ALS,. To confirm this interaction, we performed co-immunoprecipitation of FLAG-tagged MATR3 variants with endogenous TDP-43 in HEK293FT cells. As the genetic data were strongest for the p.Phe115Cys and the p.Ser85Cys, we selected these variants, as well as the p.Thr622Ala variant for which proof of pathogenicity was less clear, for further scrutiny. We found a reliable interaction that, interestingly, was increased by the p.Ser85Cys mutation, but not with the p.Phe115Cys or p.Thr622Ala variants. We also noted that p.Ser85Cys MATR3 was expressed at lower steady state levels than other variants, suggesting a structural effect of the mutation. There was no alteration in interaction between MATR3 and a second protein interactor, DHX9, demonstrating that the effect of p.Ser85Cys is specific for TDP-43 and not generalized to all interactions of MATR3. Both interactions were abolished by RNase (), demonstrating that they are RNA-dependent. Co-immunoprecipitation of endogenous protein confirmed that MATR3 and TDP-43 interact at the endogenous level. Also consistent with an interaction, MATR3 and TDP-43 co-aggregated in skeletal muscle tissue of a patient carrying the p.Ser85Cys mutation. Differential effects of different mutations within the same gene have been reported for other neurodegenerative diseases, such as _LRRK2_ (a cause of familial Parkinsons disease) and _FUS_ (a cause of familial ALS). Therefore, the lack of effect of p.Phe115Cys and p.Thr622Ale on MATR3/TDP-43 interaction does not necessarily preclude their pathogenicity, as it is possible that these mutations disrupt other cellular processes in a manner that would not be detected by our assays. The variants found in _MATR3_ were distributed across the length of protein, perhaps disrupting different nearby domains. Indeed, multiple functions have been associated with _MATR3_, including RNA processing, retention of hyper-edited RNA, gene silencing through interaction with Ago-containing complexes, chromatin organization, and mediating neuronal cell death in response to NMDA glutamate receptor activation. We also note that the p.Ser85Cys variant only alters interaction with TDP-43 and not another MATR3 partner, DHX9. However, and reminiscent of mutations in VAPB, p.Ser85Cys is notably less stable than other MATR3 variants. We infer that, of the genetic variants tested, p.Ser85Cys has the strongest effect on protein structure and this is correlated with a change in affinity for TDP-43. The structural basis of this interaction will need to be resolved in future studies. In this regard, it is interesting to note that the p.Ser85Cys mutation in _MATR3_ was associated with slowly progressive form of ALS, whereas individuals carrying the p.Phe115Cys mutation typically died from respiratory failure within five years of symptom onset. Similar phenotype variability has been observed for other ALS genes. For example, the A4V mutation of _SOD1_ is associated with an aggressive form of the disease with an average survival of only nine months after symptom onset. In contrast, the homozygous D90A mutation in the same gene is associated with an indolent course with patients developing respiratory failure after ten years of illness. Furthermore, the phenotype observed in some patients carrying _MATR3_ mutations combined features of ALS and myopathy. This clinical pattern is markedly similar to that observed in patients with mutations in _VCP, HNRNPA1_ and _HNRNPA2B1_, and the term multisystem proteinopathy has been used to reflect this broad pleiotropy. Exome sequencing data from the original USALS#3 family, as well as the 108 familial ALS cases, have been made available on dbGaP (accession number phs000101). The public release of such data allows other ALS researchers around the world to access, reanalyze and combine it with their own sequence data, thereby accelerating the pace of gene discovery. In summary, our genetic data identified mutations of the _MATR3_ gene as a rare cause of familial ALS and broadens the phenotype associated with this gene beyond the previously reported distal myopathy. This provides further insight into the importance of RNA metabolism in this fatal neurodegenerative disease. Future efforts to unravel the precise mechanism by which defects in RNA processing lead to motor neurodegeneration may provide novel targets for the design of rational therapies. Methods and any associated references are available in the online version of the paper. 